Bad Science

Pages

• Home
• What You Can Find Here
• About Dr Ben Goldacre
• Audio and Video
• Bad Science Shop
• Buy the Book
• Press and Media Contacts
• Send In Your Bad Science!
• Subscribe To Bad Science
• Support This Site
• The Bad Science Forums
• The Rules
• What is the MiniBlog?
• Recommended Reading

Podcast

BadScienceLinks

Subscribe

email address:

XML del.icio.us Digg it reddit Google StumbleUpon

Archives

• October 2008
• September 2008
• August 2008
• July 2008
• June 2008
• May 2008
• April 2008
• March 2008
• February 2008
• January 2008
• December 2007
• November 2007
• October 2007
• September 2007
• August 2007
• July 2007
• June 2007
• May 2007
• April 2007
• March 2007
• February 2007
• January 2007
• December 2006
• November 2006
• October 2006
• September 2006
• August 2006
• July 2006
• June 2006
• May 2006
• April 2006
• March 2006
• February 2006
• January 2006
• December 2005
• November 2005
• October 2005
• September 2005
• August 2005
• July 2005
• June 2005
• May 2005
• April 2005
• March 2005
• February 2005
• January 2005
• December 2004
• November 2004
• October 2004
• September 2004
• August 2004
• July 2004
• June 2004
• May 2004
• April 2004
• March 2004
• February 2004
• January 2004
• December 2003
• November 2003
• October 2003
• September 2003
• August 2003
• July 2003
• June 2003
• May 2003
• April 2003
• February 2003
• July 2002
• August 1007
• January 1007

Meta

• Register
• Login
• RSS
• Comments RSS
• Valid XHTML
• XFN

Recently Commented

• Bad Science teaching resources for schools
• Dope on a rope
• Nice review of my book in the British Medical Journal by Richard
Smith
• More crap journals?
• Generous review of my book in the Daily Telegraph
•"There is a plague of Jellyfish off the coast of Spain as reported in
the Guardian this week. Ben, why not take a holiday there this year."
• Haha w00t I am"Health Book Of The Week" in the Daily Mail

Search

•

The Book, now in stock at Amazon.

T-shirts

Categories

• adverts (41)
• africa (16)
• alternative medicine (174)

• acupuncture (5)
• herbal remedies (19)
• homeopathy (46)
• nutritionists (83)

• bad science (462)
• badscience (11)
• BANT (1)
• book (4)
• book reviews (3)
• brain gym (10)
• brainiac (6)
• cash-for-"stories" (11)
• celebs (13)
• chocolate (6)
• climate change (5)
• competing interests (2)
• cosmetics (13)
• craig sams (2)
• dangers (26)
• danie krugel (1)
• death (4)
• detox (5)
• dna (8)
• dore (3)
• drurrrgs (8)
• electrosensitivity (20)
• equazen (13)
• evolutionary psychology (4)
• fish oil (19)
• fuel pr (1)
• geek (1)
• gillian mckeith (24)
• gm (2)
• hate mail (7)
• heroes (3)
• heroes of bad science (3)
• Hi-Fi (2)
• history of quackery (2)
• ID (1)
• ions (5)
• journal club (14)
• laws (2)
• letters (18)
• magnets (20)
• manufacturing doubt (1)
• matthias rath (8)
• media (127)

• bbc (31)
• channel 4 (11)
• channel five (4)
• evening standard (4)
• express (17)
• independent (17)
• ITV (6)
• mail (40)
• mirror (13)
• news of the world (1)
• sun (5)
• telegraph (22)
• times (34)

• medicalisation (12)
• MiniBlog (1)
• miracles (2)
• MMR (34)
• mondo academico (2)
• MRSA (6)
• nanniebots (3)
• neurostuff (2)
• new scientist (4)
• not bad science (8)
• onanism (37)
• oxygen (9)
• patrick holford (14)
• penises (6)
• perpetual motion (3)
• PhDs, doctors, and qualifications (33)
• phone stalking (4)
• placebo (18)
• podcast (6)
• postmodernist bollocks (6)
• powerwatch - alasdair philips (9)
• pr guff (1)
• procrastination (1)
• pseudodiagnoses (1)
• psychic nonsense (1)
• psychology of woo (1)
• publication bias (2)
• qlink (1)
• quantum physics (12)
• references (55)
• regulating nonsense (2)
• regulating research (18)
• religion (23)
• roger coghill (2)
• roland kapferer (2)
• scare stories (48)
• secret data (2)
• space (4)
• statistics (58)
• stifling criticism (8)
• survey data (1)
• teaching resources (1)
• toys (1)
• very basic science (52)
• water (18)
• weight loss (10)

Posse

•?added=true
• Ambriguous
• Amoebic Vodka
• Apathy Sketchpad
• Apothecary's Drawer
• Architectures of Control:: Design with Intent
• Away from the bench
• Azimov
• B3ta
• Bad Homeopathy
• BadChemist
• BPS RESEARCH DIGEST
• BreathSpa
• BrokenHut
• Butterflies&Wheels
• Confessions of an Aca/Fan
• Confessions of an Aca/Fan: \"What is Remix Culture?\": An Interview
with Total Recut\'s Owen Gallagher (Part One)
• Denialism
• DrAust
• EducationWatch
• Exclaims
• Exploiting the desire for order:: Architectures of Control | Design
with Intent
• Gaylard
• Gimpy
• Hawk/Handsaw
• Headspace: Dogwatch corner
• Healthwatch
• Holfordmyths.org
• HolfordWatch
• LabLit
• Language Log
• Left Brain Right Brain
• Letting Off Steam
• Lifehacker
• Lifehacker, tips and downloads for getting things done?added=true
• Mike Stanton
• Mind Hacks
• Ministry of Truth
• Ministry of Truth
• monochrom
• Not Exactly Rocket Science
• Orac
• PharmaGossip
• PoorPothecary
• Prof David Colquhoun's"Improbable Science"
• Pyjamasinbananas
• PZ Myers
• Quackometer
• Quackwatch
• Ratbags.com
• SciencePunk
• Scientific Misconduct Blog
• Scientific Misconduct Blog?added=true
• Shpalman
• Skeptobot
• Spyblog
• Steinsky
• Teek
• Teek
• The Guardian
• Thinking Is Dangerou
• Twonilblankblank
• Valueaddedwater
• War On Error
• WFMU Oddmusic
• What is Ben reading?
• xkcd

Dave Ford from Durham Council performs incompetent experiments on
children.

September 27th, 2008 by Ben Goldacre in fish oil, nutritionists, bad
science |

You’ll remember the Durham fish oil “trial” story, possibly the
greatest example of scientific incompetence ever documented from a
local authority.

Initially they said - to blanket media coverage – that they were
running a trial on fish oils, giving pills to 3,000 children to see if
it improved GCSE performance. I pointed out, along with several
academics, that their experiment was incompetently designed, for no
good reason, and so would only produce false positive results. They
responded that this was okay, as they hadn’t called it a “trial”. This
was very simply untrue: they had, repeatedly, in press releases, and
interviews, and who cared anyway, because whatever you called it, this
was still a stupid experiment. Durham’s response was to edit the
online version of their press release to remove the word “trial”.

Then I asked what they were going to do in this experiment, how they
were going to measure results, and more. They refused to give me this
information – for an experiment by a public body performed on
thousands of children - so I used the Freedom of Information act. They
still refused. Then hundreds of you wrote to their information
commissioner, using the FoI, and they refused again, accusing us of
running a “vexacious campaign”.

Then the GCSE results for Durham came out: they weren’t too great, so
I asked for the results of the “trial”. Durham refused to give me this
information. Then they announced, bizarrely, untruthfully, in a formal
response to a written question: “It was never intended, and the county
council never suggested, that it would use this initiative to draw
conclusions about the effectiveness or otherwise of using fish oil to
boost exam results.”

This was, once again, very untrue. Durham’s own press release had
clearly said they were giving out the pills “to see whether the proven
benefits it has already brought children and young people in earlier
trials can boost exam performances too”. All the press coverage said
the same. The council’s chief schools inspector Dave Ford said “the
county-wide trial will continue until the pupils complete their GCSE
examinations next June, and the first test of the supplement’s
effectiveness will be when they sit their ‘mock’ exams this December.”
Suddenly this trial did not exist.

Now, bafflingly, suddenly, in defiance of their previous denials,
Durham have released some results. “Detailed analysis of the outcome
of the initiative,” they say “shows that pupils who took the Omega-3
supplement did better than those who did not.” Hardly. Let’s try to
disentangle what they think they’ve done.

“Initially, just over 3,000 Year 11 pupils began the study, taking the
Omega-3 tablets at school and at home. By the time GCSE examinations
came around, 832 pupils had 80 per cent or greater compliance.” This
is appalling. 2,168 of their subjects dropped out of the trial: they
must count these people in the results. They do not. This makes the
rest of their claimed results even more meaningless.

“Mr Ford and his colleagues then sought to identify the same number of
Year 11 pupils who had not taken the supplement and match them to
those who had, according to school, gender, prior attainment and
social background.” They originally said they were going to compare
childrens’ predicted GCSE performance (whatever on earth that means)
against actual performance. Of course, they refused to say how they
would analyse this, despite hundreds of requests: and it is vitally
important that people performing experiments are clear what they are
measuring, and how they will analyse it, before they begin, otherwise
they can move the goalposts and get a false positive result
afterwards, by slicing the cake a dozen different ways.

“The GCSE results of 629 ‘matched pairs’ – fish oil takers and
non-fish oil takers - were then analysed.” Who are these 629? I
thought it was 832? But more importantly, by selectively only looking
at the results from the pupils who were most highly adherent to the
capsules regime, they have skewed their sample, entirely
unnecessarily. They have, in fact, simply discovered that school
performance is better in children who are more highly adherent to a
school regime involving pills, and who are, in all probability, also
more adherent to everything at school, harder working, better
performing, from completely different families, with higher
aspirations, and so on. If you wanted to design an experiment to
produce a spurious false positive result, you could not do any better
than this.

This result has nothing to do with the pills, it is laughably
incompetent science, in an experiment performed on thousands of Durham
children. It has been widely reported in the local press, and in the
Telegraph (doubtless with more to come) as “perhaps there is something
in this preliminary stuff”. Every journalist is baffled by the
details. Some report that there is “controversy”, in the classic style
of journalists who simply report “two sides”.

But there are not two sides here: there is nothing in this work. It is
not “controversial”. A crap unpublished result presented in a press
release from an incompetent experiment analysed incompetently in god
knows how many different ways by incompetent people who have shrouded
themselves in secrecy and demonstrated themselves to be incapable of
making reliable true statements about their own research – or even
whether it exists - is not a “maybe”.

Fish oil pills are now the biggest selling food supplement product in
the UK, with a market size of £110m. Nobody has ever tested them. Most
damningly of all, Durham council had the children, and the pills,
necessary to perform a decent piece of research. The only thing they
were missing was the rigour, and help was offered. The only real
question now is this: why has Dave Ford performed a incompetent
experiment on thousands of children? And more importantly, why has
Durham Council let him?

del.icio.us Digg it reddit Google StumbleUpon Slashdot It!

71 Responses

1.

peterd102 said,

September 27, 2008 at 12:21 am

We can all speculate the reasons why. Was he paid, were they
desperate, was he incompetent, or was he told that the pills worked
and so didnt think a trial was needed.

Mad study that really should have been thought through a bit more.
Theres conflicting reports and i dont think anyone knows whats going
on, all we do know is that it isnt going to give us any particulary
useful information.

Well done for persisiting Ben. hopefully people wont be persuaded into
thinking that this was a proper Trial.

1.

pharmajames said,

September 27, 2008 at 12:21 am

The don’t like it up ‘em Ben - they don’t like it up ‘em. Good work.

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 27, 2008 at 1:19 am

Unfortunately, journalists, in their desire to appear fair and write a
balanced article, tend to offer two opposing views on a situation and
leave the reader to draw a conclusion. In this case, it’s a bit like
the creationist versus evolution debate. The former is superstitious
drivel, the latter is logical, rational and testable. A way I have
used to describe David Ford’s and DCC’s behaviour in this affair is to
call it intellectual tennis without a net. Whatever people “serve” to
DCC in the form of questions or justifiable criticism, it is done with
the net of rational scrutiny up. David Ford and DCC however, give
their “returns of serve” and indeed their “serves” with that net down.
In other words, they say what they like, change the story to fit their
current needs and expect to be believed. And because of their refusal
to reveal any of their plan or methodology, they cannot be challenged.
David Ford has clearly displayed incompetence in this affair, despite
his claims that he never intended it to be a study. The evidence
indicates otherwise. All of this could be quickly settled if he were
to publish his trial/study/initiative (delete as politically
expedient) online. Of course that assumes that he had a written plan.
DCC’s resident expert in this field, Dr Madeleine Portwood seems to be
mysteriously absent these days. One would have expected her to at
least say something, however slight, in support. I should think being
associated with this particular “turkey” will not have done her
credibility for any future research into the possible effects of Omega
3 supplement on children’s academic performance, much good and so she
may be attempting to distance herself from it. Unfortunately for her,
she was fully involved at the start, as an e-mail from her to all
Durham secondary schools, headed “Omega 3 Fish Oil Trials” in which
she refers to “this initiative” and “the study” (thereby using the
full range of DCC’s shifting terminology in one go!)shows.

1.

peterd102 said,

September 27, 2008 at 1:27 am

Presenting both sides is good, but trying to equalize them when they
are issues of science is not going to work.

Lol just watching Live at the Apollo as i was writing this and the guy
is saying about Gillian McKeith:
“She presents that show ‘you are what you eat’ so at some point in her
life she has eaten a proper miserable bitch”

“She says ‘ive looked at your poo, and it stinks’, and you think out
of the two of them who needs to reasess their life the most”

Just thought id cheer you all up

1.

cebolla said,

September 27, 2008 at 2:36 am

Sarah Kennedy mentioned it on radio 2 a few days ago on her ‘reading
stuff from papers” section. It made me issue stink. But, I mean, I’m
not a listener or anything, it was coincidence that the radio was on.

1.

ayupmeduck said,

September 27, 2008 at 7:49 am

Obviously Dave Ford and some people around him at Durham Council are
clueless, but what irks me most is that they managed to twist the
Freedom of Imformation (FOI) Act to do exactly the opposite of what it
was indended for.

1.

evidencekagoul said,

September 27, 2008 at 9:08 am

Posted this elsewhere by mistake:

There is one thing that really concerns me about this piece of
experimentation. I’m a health researcher. If I want to do research
involving either adults on children, I need to get full ethical
clearance from an ethics committee. In the past, when I have been
involved in research involving children in schools, it has had to have
explicit ethical approval from the ethics committee of the relevant
education department, and also by a separate University ethics
committee. This is as it should be. If I didn’t do this, I would
probably be severly disciplined and possibly lose my job. It would
also be in violation of the Delaration of Helsinki, which among other
things covers medical experimentation - which giving children fishy
tablets surely is - whether or not it is physicians giving out the
pills. In any case the Declaration also covers human experiments (like
htis one) conducted by non-medics. But here we have experimenters
doling out drugs to children, apparently with the blessing of the
council, head teachers and so on. So the key questions are: 1) what
ethics committee, if any, agreed to this study, and if they did, can
we see the minutes of the relevant meeting; and 2) if this was not
passed by any ethics committee, why were the experimenters allowed to
conduct medical experiments (whether methodically rigorous or not) on
schoolchildren? Or have I missed something…

1.

JoG said,

September 27, 2008 at 10:52 am

Thanks, Ben for keeping up the pressure on this. I agree with
Evidencekagoul. How do they get away with this? I’ve had to get
multiple ethics and R&D approval to interview doctors and nurses for
research projects. Durham County Council appears to have been carrying
out invalid and therefore unethical experiments on children. Where is
the scrutiny?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 27, 2008 at 11:30 am

Yes, Evidencekagoul, what you have missed is the slipperiness of the
Fish Oil Farce team at DCC. Their “defence” on this one (no laughter,
please!)was given one month after I asked the relevant question in the
council chamber on 7th february 2007, as follows:

“A recommendation to use Omega 3 supplement was made by officers in
line with the normal advisory relationship between the county council
and its schools. In that sense, members were not directly involved in
the decision, although key members were made aware of and supported
providing this opportunity to schools.”

So there was no member scrutiny, as JQH discovered when he asked under
a FOI request and was told that no plan was submitted to members for
scrutiny. Presumably they will use the same “defence” when it comes to
liaising with the Health Authorities and their ethics committee.

But all of the very strong evidence clearly indicates that the
trial/study/initiative was centrally planned, led and managed by one
David Ford.

This defence, produced a month late (they studiously ignored my
question initially, clearly hoping it would all go away!)was, in my
opinion a back-tracked, cobbled together necessity to get them out of
that particular hole.

What kind of officers undertake a project of that size, without
appropriate member scrutiny?

And what bunch of dozy councillors allowed them to do it.

My letter to Councillor Claire Vasey (then DCC Lead member for
Children’s Services) of 31st October 2006, asking very pertinent
questions, (which she simply ducked by passing it to David Ford to
answer, obviously not having a clue herself)is available for scrutiny.
It contains, among other things, the following questions:

Did DCC approach Equazen or vice-versa?

Have there been any financial or other inducements from Equazen, in
cash or in kind?

Who planned the “trial” or initiative?

What are its stated aims and objectives?

have they been changed following the recent events in the national
media?

Who sanctioned its implementation in schools?

Was a written plan for the “trial” or initiative prepared?

If so, who wrote it?

What supporting documentation, if any, was given to the participating
schools?

Were briefing meetings held for the participating schools?

Was a coherent evaluation strategy for the “trial” or initiative
prepared as part of the “trial” plan?

Is so, how was the “trial” to be evaluated?

Who is leading the “trial” or initiative?

Who is responsible for its evaluation?

Who prepared the material for the DCC press releases on the “trial” or
initiative?

Why was it that nobody, including Dr Portwood, Senior Educational
Psychologist, and David Ford, Chief Education Inspector (whose main
subject in his teacher training was science) could see that without
some form of “control” in the “trial,” the results will be absolutely
worthless?

Why did David Ford, following ridicule of the “trial” by Ben Goldacre
in the Bad Science column, suddenly declare to him that it was not a
“trial,” but an “initiative”?
Why is it reported by the “You and Yours” team that the “trial” or
“initiative” has the full backing of county councillors?

Has the “trial” been discussed and agreed in any committee of members
of DCC?

If so, what briefing papers were provided and was the “initiative”
described as a trial?

Were the methodological implications of the “trial” or “initiative”
explained to members?

Were the evaluation implications of the “trial” (i.e. that any results
would be meaningless) explained to members?

Did members raise any questions or doubts and if so, how were these
dealt with?

If so, what discussion, if any, took place regarding the ethical
considerations of becoming involved with a company such as Equazen,
which has a clear commercial imperative?

Who signed the “deal” with Equazen?

Do members actually realise the damage that has been done to DCC
through being pilloried in this way in the national press?

Why has no-one in DCC realised that what eleven year-old children in
science in the authority’s primary schools are taught concerning
controls in experiments and fair testing, would enable those very
children to understand why the “trial” was not only fatally flawed,
but worse than that, a travesty of scientific method?

Students in Year Eleven, being given fish oil capsules and studying
science, will be more than capable of understanding the glaring flaws
in the methodology of the “trial” in which they are participating as
part of the study cohort. Does a scientist like David Ford, who
presumably inspects science teaching, or indeed anyone else in his
department, not appreciate the inherent irony here, that the students
could certainly have designed a proper trial, yielding significant
data?

I also have david Ford’s reply.

1.

j said,

September 27, 2008 at 12:27 pm

McCruiskeen- have you thought of starting a blog? It would be great to
have some of this online, and it’s only five minutes work at
www.wordpress.com

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 27, 2008 at 1:15 pm

Dear J,

I hadn’t until JQH suggested it to me yesterday and now you today. I
have grasped the nettle and registered at Wordpress as maccruiskeen.

Now I just have to work out what the hell to do!!

McC

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 27, 2008 at 1:26 pm

Have you noticed how far back Equazen have stepped in this? Now that
the excrement has well and truly hit the fan, they are keeping well
out of sight. I doubt they wish the product they gave so generously
and philanthropically to be sullied by any of this criticism.
Meanwhile, David Ford is left to keep smiling, while attempting to
defend the indefensible. But then he is not bound by commercial
considerations and has the backing of Durham County Council.

1.

le canard noir said,

September 27, 2008 at 1:33 pm

I expect Equa$en to be quite happy about this. After all, Durham
insist that the kids taking the fishy pills did better in schools.
That is all Equa$en want to hear.

1.

Jeesh42 said,

September 27, 2008 at 3:31 pm

Nick Davies was right about journalists confusing neutrality for
objectivity, when one side of the argument is clearly rubbish. They
either do so because they’re too thick to understand the science,
because they can’t be bothered to investigate the science by asking
experts and making an informed opinion (which they have the option to,
and their readers don’t), or because they’re just covering they’re
backs and think sitting on a fence is the safest option.

1.

Skeptico said,

September 27, 2008 at 7:03 pm

Even if they had included all 2,168 children in the results, the study
would still have been meaningless. The control group should have been
given a placebo.

1.

Jellytussle said,

September 27, 2008 at 7:13 pm

What evidence kagoul and Mccruiskeen said, and what has been discussed
in threads passim.

These guys have tried to wriggle out of their ethical responsiblities
by doging around the semantics of “trial” and “initiative.” The fact
remains they performed an experiment on children. OK, most informed
folks probably believe the fish oil has no effect at all. However, for
the sake of argument, what if the fish oil were to have a detrimental
effect on performance: these children could have been disadvantaged by
taking part. By not measuring outcomes scrupulously and in a
statistically rigorous fashion, Durham council has abused its
responsiblity to the children under its care.

This is quite apart from whether the trial conformed to Good Clinical
Practice.

The Durham Fish Oil Trial is not exactly Tuskegee, but the Principle
Investigator needs to answer some quite serious questions.

1.

Sili said,

September 27, 2008 at 7:31 pm

I know the alties will scream bloody murder and oppression, but …

Would it be possible to press charges against Ford and Portwood? It
seems clear that they’re in breach of the Helsinki Declaration and as
such presumably English Law.

Obviously the police must have better things to spend their time on,
but given the utter uncoöperativity it’s hard not to think that some
degree of force is in order.

1.

j said,

September 27, 2008 at 7:40 pm

I think most would agree that fish oil does have *some* effects in a
suitable dose, even if these are not the effects that Durham may have
hoped for. For example, fish oil supplements can cause GI
disturbances, cause fishy burps, increase bleeding time, etc.

I wonder if the parents and children were given information on
potential adverse effects from the pills, to allow them to give
informed consent to their participating the the trial? Cough, sorry,
the initiative. Seeing the relatively poor compliance rates
(especially poor given that the pills were handed out in school) I
also wonder if adverse effects played a significant role in the low
compliance? It would be nice to think that Durham had asked those who
gave up on the pills about why, and that they would make these data
public…

1.

David Mingay said,

September 27, 2008 at 8:18 pm

Sili: I certainly think someone should have a word with the British
Psychological Society about Dr Portwood.

1.

evidencekagoul said,

September 27, 2008 at 10:43 pm

“About bleeding time”… So, given that there is (real) trial-based
evidence that fish oils increase bleeding time in adults, and in
healthy young adults (e.g. Mundal et al, 1994), one would be entitled
to ask DCC/Ford whether children at any risk of bleeding/GI
disturbance were identified and excluded from the study in advance. Of
course Ford and Portwood would have done this. Wouldn’t they?
Anyway… bloody well done McCruiskeen. Just thinking about the sheer
dishonesty of all this gives me “GI disturbance”.

1.

bob sterman said,

September 27, 2008 at 10:51 pm

Sili asked “Would it be possible to press charges against Ford and
Portwood? It seems clear that they’re in breach of the Helsinki
Declaration and as such presumably English Law.”

The Helsinki Declaration does not form part of English Law. It’s a
statement of ethical principles - not a list of specific offences.

1.

rhodian said,

September 27, 2008 at 11:58 pm

well, never mind fish oil - you came across great on radio ulster this
morning, ben! a necessary antidote to hearing a colleague describing
getting their aura cleaned yesterday!

1.

evidencebasedeating said,

September 28, 2008 at 1:29 am

The sad thing is that this form of pill-pushing is becoming widespread
in UK schools - solely due the the lack of DoE direction for
headteachers when approached by any Adam, Madeleine or Patrick.

Head teachers become ‘rabbits in the headlight’ of smooth talking
pseuds who claim nutrition/psychologist backgrounds (ie health
scienciness that they admire but lack any real knowledge of).

Tentative forays such as ‘healthy eating for school lunch’ PTA events
are well received, and everyone basks in the pro-active stance. In
fact, healthy eating DOES improve kids development - thats all is
needed. Honestly. Research supports this. Some may benefit from a
kiddie one-a-day multivit/min - easily and cheaply purchased on 3-4-2
offers on the high street.

Fast forward 3-6 months then the grooming of intelligent parents/ SEN
kids begins for the ‘diagnostic tests for food allergy’, the
pill-pushing fish oil/ optimum nutrition for your kiddies Key stage
1/2/3/4 supplements, the clinically irrelevant blood tests and the
availability of the pseud for ‘private nutrition consultations’- and
voila/ ker-ching! Your pseud has reaped their financial rewards for
minimum outlay!

Eventually it comes to the attention of someone with ‘real’
qualifications in the area - who perform an ‘Emperors new clothes’
denudement of the nutrition-lite approach. Headteacher quietly drops
organisation from extra-curricular activities, after all its a bit
embarrassing to acknowledge you were duped, being the educational lead
for the school, after all …

But never mind, the money has been made, the kids/parents exploited.
Another day, another school head to schmooze.

Only in Durhams case, even the Education Authority was duped.

never mind - would make a good piece of critical evaluation coursework
for A level statistics, or biology.

1.

pv said,

September 28, 2008 at 2:04 am

Honestly, does anyone really believe they really intended this to be a
real trial?
In the words of General Sir Anthony Cecil Hogmanay Melchett, to
Captain Blackadder, perhaps “the cover story was… just a cover story”.
A ruse, as it were. A marketing exercise crudely disguised, for the
benefit of sports writers masquerading as medical journalists, as a
trial of fish oil capsule to discover their efficacy for a particular
purpose.
From that point of view they can regard it as a success. From the
point of view of actually discovering anything at all it seems to have
been a resounding failure. But then the format rather indicates that
discovery of anything useful (apart from public gullibility) wasn’t on
high their “to-do” or “must-have” lists.

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 28, 2008 at 2:19 am

My MP, sent me a standard letter through the post asking if he could
count on my support for the Labour candidates in the May County
Council elections.

I replied telling him that I would not be votong for them, because I
conisidered Labour controlled Durham County Council to be morally
bankrupt because of their handling of the Fish Oil Farce.

He replied to me sayinhg that he had written to the Chief executive of
Durham County Council, requesting an explanation.

Some time later, he replied again, enclosing the explanation he had
received from David Williams, DCC Corporate Director of Children and
Young People’s Services. he also enclosed a complaint form for the
Local Government Ombusdsman, explaining that whilst he could not force
DCC to change anything, I might wish to submit a complaint to the
Ombudsman. At the time, I felt that such a complaint would be a waste
of time. Now, after the release of their truly pathetic matched pair
statistics, think it may be necessary to do so and as a citizen of
County Durham, I intend to submit a complaint on the grounds of
unethical and incompetent behaviour on the part of Officers and
incompetence on the part of Members for their lack of appropriate
scrutiny.

The letter from the Director of Children and Young People’s Services
that the MP sent me contained an explanation that was a travesty of
the truth. I replied to the MP, “Unfortunately, far from being useful
in explaining the situation, David Williams’ explanation to you
actually continues the county council’s apparent practice of
obfuscation in this affair by “rewriting the script” whilst being
economical with the truth. His account is in contradiction with the
evidence, minimises and omits key features, is at best misleading and
at worst, untrue.”

Now that I have my Blog page opened, I hope to start posting some of
the vast amount of correspondence I have on this matter, together with
annotation and commentary upon it (after an online tutorial from
JQH!!)

So take heart from the fact that it’s not just us poor concerned
people that Labour-controlled Durham County Council stonewalls,
misleads and treats with contempt. They bullshit the Honourable Labour
Member for North Durham too!!

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 28, 2008 at 12:08 pm

PV has raised an interesting issue. Ben Goldacre ened his piece
with,”The only real question now is this: why has Dave Ford performed
a incompetent experiment on thousands of children? And more
importantly, why has Durham Council let him?”

The answers to PV’s and Ben’s questions, in my opinion, lie in a
complicated tangle of dynamics involving, at least, the following
factors:

1. The social, corporate and political dynamics of Durham County
Council and in particular of its then Education Department.

2. David Ford’s rise through the hierarchy of the latter.

3. David Ford’s influence within that department.

4. The Education Department’s relationship with its schools (a
fascinating study in itself as they gradually became “autonmous,” but
were assiduously cultivated to remain “onside!”

5. David Ford’s relationship with those schools, their staffs, but
particularly their head teachers.

6. The target-led, assessment-driven curriculum and the constant
scrutiny by the government of performance.

7. Durham’s problem with failing schools and the Ofsted inspection
regime.

8. GCSE results

9. The retirement of Keith Mitchell, Director of Education’ leading to
the merging of departments to form Children and Young people’s
Services.

10. The appointment of David Williams as Corporate Director of the new
Service.

11. The appointment of individuals to “new” key senior posts within
this new service.

12. GCSE results (I know I’ve already mentioned them!)

13. GCSE results!!

14. The post of Head of Achievemnt Services in the new structure.

15. The soliciting of £1m worth of “free” fish oil capsules by DCC
from a certain supplier of those products.

16. Dr Madeleine Portwood

17. David Ford

18. A plan!

19. Ambition

20. Arrogance

21. Vanity

22. Subterfuge

23. Denial

24. Incompetence

25. Cover up

26. Lack of appropriate scrutiny by council Members

27. Lack of appropriate knowledge of council members

28. Tail wagging the dog!

I think all of these factors played, to a greater or lesser extent, a
part in the David Ford’s Fish Oil Farce. I wonder if any one can think
of others?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 28, 2008 at 12:13 pm

Apologies!

My penultimate sentence should have read:

I think all of these factors played, to a greater or lesser extent, a
part in the David Ford Fish Oil Farce.

(It’s just such a pity that he is not called Francis!)

1.

peterd102 said,

September 28, 2008 at 12:44 pm

I think thats a fair round up of all the reasons, and no need to
apologise.

1.

Dr Aust said,

September 28, 2008 at 1:15 pm

Glad to hear McCruiskeen is setting up a blog to post the material. Do
we have the URL yet, McC?

I have added my (not very original) thoughts on the re-risen Fish Oil
Zombie here (Conflicting Interest: shameless self-plug).

PS I have the first verse of a Durham Fish-ditty derived from “When
The Boat Comes In”:

“I smell something iffy

Quite distinctly fishy

Durham’s special trial ishy*

When nurr vote got done**”

* short for initiative - couldn’t think of a rhyme

** as in “the Council never voted on this”

- so if anyone else is feeling lyrical… feel free to contribute more
verses.

1.

Dr Aust said,

September 28, 2008 at 1:16 pm

PS Sorry - “trial” in the 3rd line was meant to be strikethrough text,
but I don’t know how to code it on here. Anyway, you get the idea.

1.

Mojo said,

September 28, 2008 at 2:41 pm

Did they actually use kids who had dropped out of the trial, sorry,
“initiative” as their “matched” controls, or did they manage to find
some who hadn’t taken part at all? It’s not entirely clear from the
coverage I’ve seen.

1.

David Mingay said,

September 28, 2008 at 2:47 pm

David Ford sings:

I thought they’d all get brainy,
I’d be on the gravy trainy
But it’s money down the drainy,
When the gcse results come in.

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 28, 2008 at 3:50 pm

URL? Stop getting technical with me Dr Aust!

My blog can be found at:

http://maccruiskeen.wordpress.com/

Note the difference in spelling.

Now I had better get something in it (or should that be on it?)

1.

gadgeezer said,

September 28, 2008 at 4:51 pm

Dance ti’ thy daddy, sing ti’ thy mammy,
Dance ti’ thy daddy, ti’ thy mammy sing;
Thou shall hev a fishy on a little dishy,
Thou shall hev a fishy when the boat comes in.

Grill kipper, Dave Ford
Serve it out, Portwood
Kids will turn canny, fish oil grows their brains.
If schools served more fishy in a tasty dishy
Those pills, costly/fishy, would be dropped in bin.

1.

JQH said,

September 28, 2008 at 5:44 pm

J, the bumf I eventually extracted from DCC under the FoI Act made no
mention of those side effects.

It would be a shame if sopme shyster lawyer reading this were to
decide that there was money to be made in finding one of DCC’s
experimental subjects who had suffered side effects, now wouldn’t it?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 28, 2008 at 6:29 pm

I’ve written my first blog page (sorry the format is a bit untidy!)

You can find it at:

http://maccruiskeen.wordpress.com

McC

1.

brainfever said,

September 28, 2008 at 6:36 pm

This bloody fish oil scam caused a HUGE argument between my wife and I
! she wanted to dose our eldest with this c*** and I said there was no
evidence to back-up their claims (showed her your excellent blog btw).
She bought one bottle, gave a few doses and quietly dropped it, so
good sense prevailed! Keep up the good work, you are one of the few
sane voices (PZ Myers/R.Dawkins) in a blogsphere tending to white
noise.

1.

Dr Aust said,

September 28, 2008 at 7:28 pm

Just stuck up a link to your blog, M(a)cC. Welcome to the world of
online ranting.

1.

robshorrock said,

September 29, 2008 at 10:56 am

We need to be vigilant as the press are still sloppily reporting this
without looking at the obvious. Children and Young People Now, a trade
journal just seems to have printed the council press release. Would be
worth leaving comments to stop other local authorities following suit:

http://www.cypnow.co.uk/bulletins/Daily-Bulletin/news/849214/?DCMP=EMC-DailyBulletin

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 29, 2008 at 11:07 am

after the cloudiest summer in living memory perhaps this could be
re-branded as a vitamin D supplementation program?

1.

j said,

September 29, 2008 at 11:49 am

I just realised another oddity about this (non)trial - while most of
the coverage focuses exclusively on the magic powers of fish oil/omega
3, Eye Q capsules also contain evening primrose oil

http://holfordwatch.info/2008/09/29/durham-fish-oil-nontrial-and-science-by-press-release-its-unclear
-what-the-children-were-taking/

1.

boro_dave said,

September 29, 2008 at 12:59 pm

Very interesting about the Evening Primrose Oil.

There are also known side-effects of taking Evening Primrose Oil (EPO)
- as someone with epilepsy, when I was diagnosed many years ago I was
told to avoid EPO as it could increase the frequency of seizures.
Apparently it lowers the seizure threshold - see Epilepsy Action
website: http://www.epilepsy.org.uk/info/epo

Approx. 1 in 131 people in the UK have epilepsy, so in a group of
3000+ teenagers you might expect over 20 to have the condition. Were
they screened out before hand? Was there further screening for the
known effects of other ingredients that are known to be biologically
active?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 29, 2008 at 1:03 pm

Re: Rob Shorrock’s post about the Children and Young People Now
website; a John Smith has, interestingly, defended DCC’s “trial” in a
comment there, on the grounds that it would have been unethical to
have given a placebo to students about to sit exams.

1.

zuclopenthixol said,

September 29, 2008 at 1:17 pm

Ben, you ask about the ‘predicted’ results, and I’m not sure if you
are being tongue in cheek when you say, ‘what ever on earth that
means’.

As a governor at a local school, I was surprised to see the results
for every named child from an organisation called the Fisher Family
Trust ( www.fischertrust.org/) which gave their predicted results from
key stage one to two. I would imagine these exist for KS two to three,
and three to GCSE’s. I would also be surprised if they didn’t exist
for AS and A’ Levels.

For those of you who are banging on about Ethics Committee approval,
have you read Iain Chalmers work in the BMJ about how unethical Ethics
Committees are?

Based on the principle that if you want to kill all of your patients
by giving them something, you can, but if you want to test if you are
killing your patients by giving it to half of them and a control to
the other half, you have to apply to an ethics committee and stand the
chance of being rejected.

1.

standing_here said,

September 29, 2008 at 1:35 pm

A quick google search seems to bring up a number of pages suggesting a
possible link between taking evening primrose oil, and an increased
risk of seizures in people who have epilepsy. The only paper I can
find that says that this link is spurious is one written by B.K.Puri
(a name familiar from some of the previous fish oil articles), and
published AFTER the trial/initiative had started, and refering to two
earlier papers from the 80s which seemed to show a link. Given this, I
wonder what steps were taken to exclude epileptic pupils from this
study.

1.

Will Davies said,

September 29, 2008 at 2:52 pm

As a student at Durham University, I feel embarrassed that neither the
School of Medecine in Stockton, the Biology departent, or the Faculty
of Science have made any comment on this farce going on right under
their noses.

I hoped that my institution might have considered public communication
of science (and guarding the local community from pseudoscientific
bullshit) one of its duties. Apparently not.

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 29, 2008 at 2:55 pm

i was surprised that in this case the placebo effect didn’t result in
improved exam performances. Any ideas?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 29, 2008 at 3:13 pm

Well said, Will Davies!

Meanwhile, Dr Madeleine Portwood is to speak at the Brain Food
Conference 10th - 12th October. Details at:

http://www.foodforthebrain.org/content.asp?id_Content=1772&id_Content_Parent_Override=1775&inc=det

I wonder if DCC’s very own contribution to knowledge in this area will
get a mention from her?

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 29, 2008 at 4:45 pm

…perhaps fishoil capsules are less effective than homeopathy?

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 29, 2008 at 4:46 pm

…or maybe the ‘researchers’ didn’t inspire much confidence in their
subjects?

1.

peterd102 said,

September 29, 2008 at 6:04 pm

@getonyourbike

Either the exam result improvment rate was going to go down regardless
or, my hypothesis is that the children got over confident as they were
being given a pill that improved their test scores and so didn’t
revise as much. The placebo effect was in the childrens confidence,
this had a nocebo effect on the amount of revision they would do.

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 29, 2008 at 7:47 pm

That’s possible, though i suspect that healthy teenagers are naturally
more skeptical (of meddling adults) than anxious adults (are of
homeopathy) and so are less susceptible to the placebo effect. It
would be interesting to look at placebo trials before, during and
after the pernicious effects of a modern education.

And fish oil capsules give you fishy burps, which i’ve been informed
by teenagers unfortunate enough to have been force-fed them (only old
people take them willingly) so that might have contributed to the
nocebo theory @peterd102

1.

rogerhyam said,

September 29, 2008 at 8:03 pm

Most people are greedy and lazy. This means they don’t think hard
enough to cook up a good conspiracy but cock things up by lazily
thinking about themselves rather than others. So don’t knock David
Ford he is probably just normal.

Of course I may have this degenerate opinion because I had an allergy
to fish from birth. I can honestly say (and probably scientifically
proved) that I am incapable of ever having successfully consumed any
fish. Oh and I have been a veggie for 17 years. Thick as a brick me I
am that me.

1.

Lemonade Lily said,

September 29, 2008 at 8:06 pm

McC
I almost wish I had the odd couple of hundred quid to go to the ‘Brain
Food Conference’ -having seen the illustrious list of ‘partners’
aupporting the event, viz. BioCare, Equazen, Institute for Optimum
Nutrition, British Association for Nutritional Therapy…..it’s all just
a bit consanguineous.

Will D - my university (sic) doesn’t guard the public against
pseudoscientific bullshit either - it teaches it!

1.

Dr Aust said,

September 29, 2008 at 8:34 pm

Yes, I think the coincidence in timing between all this and the
upcoming FFTB conference is, er, not a coincidence. I have written
about this on the blog. The conference is in large part a fish-oil
love-fest, if you check out the sponsors (inc Equa£en) and speakers.

We have also been talking about the fishy burp problem and consequent
problem of non-blind of blinding even in placebo-controlled trials. If
you wanted to do a proper large scale human trial one would think
solving the “appropriate placebo” problem would be an important thing
to do.

Of course, Durham avoided this by having no control group, let alone
no placebo arm..!

Treble fish oil capsules and large pay rises all round, one might
suppose…

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 29, 2008 at 9:08 pm

Watching this unfurl does give me a sense of vicarious joy and
achievement, rather like witnessing the fall of Rath and believing
that a tiny blog of encouragement helped.
Keep the pressure up Ben (and everyone else involved)

1.

Dr* T said,

September 29, 2008 at 9:17 pm

Sorry if this has been posted before, but the Press Association put
out a press release which contains this line:

Dave Ford, of Durham County Council’s Children and Young People’s
Services, said there was no plan to continue providing children with
the fish oil capsules now that the donated pills had run out.

He said he had been “upset” by the level of criticism the project had
attracted from the scientific community. But he said the council had
never set out to conduct a scientific experiment.

—-
So we are back from trial to initiative. He really should resign.

1.

Filias Cupio said,

September 30, 2008 at 11:01 pm

While you do have truth on your side, I see that you’ve just
publically accused several people of incompetence and medical
experimentation on children without ethical oversite. Having just
escaped one ill-founded libel suit, I wonder if you’re sailing into
another.

About now, your Guardian employers must be looking at the cost of of
your column: 10000* pounds per year for writing, 500000 pounds per
year for legal costs. I hope they keep backing you, anyway.

* Wild guess by me - I have no inside knowledge.

1.

McCruiskeen said,

September 30, 2008 at 11:07 pm

Filias,

One presumes that Ben’s column is checked by editorial staff who, in
addiition to their own experience in these matters, will have access
to appropriate legal advice from legal professionals.

1.

pv said,

September 30, 2008 at 11:53 pm

He said he had been “upset” by the level of criticism the project had
attracted from the scientific community. But he said the council had
never set out to conduct a scientific experiment.

Is that not a tad disingenuous?

If it wasn’t supposed to be a scientific trial (”experiment” has Dr
Mengele overtones here), the only other thing that could possibly have
been intended was a marketing exercise for the company that supplied
the product. After all they were mentioned enough in press releases
and the national press.
It does prompt a couple of questions:
Is it really the job of David Ford on behalf of DCC to conduct a
product placement exercise on behalf of a commercial entity?
And, is this a case of corruption or rank incompetence?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

October 1, 2008 at 11:27 am

If it was never a “Trial” or “Study” then David Ford and DCC should
have been much more circumspect in their press releases and quotations
to the media. If David Ford reents the criticism he has received, he
only has himslef to blame, it seems to me, and he continues to be
evasive in his repsonses.

There is no doubt in my mind that this was in part a gigantic
marketing exercise for a certain company who mentioned Durham County
Council in their advertising. Commercial reality dictates that the
company would hardly supply supply £1m worth of “free” capsules to DCC
for a properly conducted study, the results of which could have been
indifferent or even negative. That would have been expensive
commercial suicide.

Desperation may also have played a part. There is tremendous pressure
on local authorities such as Durham to raise their game in their
schools, as measured by GCSE scores. David Ford may well have thought
that the capsules may have had some effect and so there was nothing to
be lost in promoting his “Brainchild.”

Equally, he may have felt that the Hawthorn effect might have assisted
even if the capsules themselves did not.

In any event, one cannot fault his desire to assist some of the most
socially disadvantaged children in the country (with the government
breathing down his neck!) by rolling out his “Brainchild.” In my
opinion, where he went wrong was in seeking publicity for it!

It was not necessary, so why did he do it? Pressure from Equazen who
clearly needed it and were footing the bill? Raising his own and DCC’s
profile?

Whatever the reasons, it all went disastrously pear shaped and
attracted all kinds of legitimate criticism, which David Ford now
resents.

Things have changed at Durham County Council. It now has a leader with
a brain, in Councillor Simon Henig. Hopefully scrutiny by members will
improve. How can you ask appropriate questions about something you do
not understand?
I doubt that David Ford will ever get away with another “wheeze” like
this!

1.

pv said,

October 1, 2008 at 1:04 pm

I doubt that David Ford will ever get away with another “wheeze” like
this!

It would be rather nice if he wasn’t allowed to get away with this
one.

1.

Dr* T said,

October 2, 2008 at 11:03 pm

I agree. There are a lot of questions that a decent full-time
investigative journalist should be sniffing out answers for. I reckon
there is a cracking scoop still to be had.

Stinks like fish.

1.

McCruiskeen said,

October 3, 2008 at 12:49 am

There is and it’s to do with what was going on in DCC’s then Education
Department, now Children and Young People’s Services and what the role
of Council Members was. Unless or until there are Members on scrutiny
committees who actually understand some of the complex issues
involved, then appropriate questions will never be asked and scrutiny
will be a joke, which I think it was in this case. The final admission
on why there had been no scrutiny (or as DCC claim, why scrutiny was
not necessary) was dragged out of them eventually, by asking a
question in the council chamber at the Public Questions session in
February 2007. DCC studiously avoided answering it. (I asked three;
they answered two!) It took them a month to think about it and popst a
supplemental answer on their Public Questions website as follows:

“A recommendation to use Omega 3 supplement was made by officers in
line with the normal advisory relationship between the county council
and its schools. In that sense, members were not directly involved in
the decision, although key members were made aware of and supported
providing this opportunity to schools.”

Was this always part of David Ford’s plan or was this “explanation”
put together following my question. My own view is that they simply
tried ignoring my question, but when I immediately wrote to Councillor
Vasey (who had given the answers in the chamber) saying that she had
not answered my important question in the chamber, she was continuing
to avoid answering it, she was clearly avoiding having an answer put
on the public record and that her actions were morally reprehensible.
A couple of weeks later, the above answer appeared!

One year later, in February 2008, I submitted my three questions to
the Public Questions session in the council chamber, as Ben mentions
on page 149 of his excellent book, and dragged out of them the
response that Ben notes.

The really fascinating thing is the version of this whole affair given
by the DCC Corporate Director of Children and Young People’s Services
(David Ford’s new boss) to the Honourable Member for North Durham
(Labour) Kevan JOnes MP, which is not congruent with DCC’s own
official version of events.

As I replied to Kevan Jones MP, having received a copy of this
“explanation” from him, “Unfortunately,far from being useful in
explaining the situation, David Williams explanation to you actually
continues the county council’s apparent practice of obfuscation in
this affair by “rewriting the script” whilst being economical with the
truth. His account is in contradiction with the evidence, minimises
and omits key features, is at best misleading and at worst, untrue.”

Kevan Jones replied saying there was basically nothing he could do and
suggested I complain to the Local Government Ombudsman, helpfully
enclosing a complaint form.

As I said in an earlier post, what chance do we concerned people stand
if DCC is quite prepared to “bullshit” a Labour MP?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

October 3, 2008 at 12:51 am

I forgot to add that the media just don’t seem interested.

1.

robshorrock said,

October 3, 2008 at 11:30 pm

There are a number of options on pursuing this:

The local safeguarding children board could be asked to investigate
how children were exploited in an exercise that essentially told them
they would get better results if they took the fish oil capsules. The
board has some independence from the council and could set in place
clear guidance on the way children should be used in studies in the
future.

I think it is definitely worth referring the Mr Ford to the Standards
Committee. What does anyone else think?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

October 4, 2008 at 8:28 am

Robshorrock - I, for one, had not considered that option. Referral to
the Local Government Ombudsman must be made within one year of the
event about which one complains. The Director of DCC Children and
Young People’s Services “bullshits” an enquiring MP and David Ford is
interviewed on BBC NE television, coming across as aggrieved about
being misunderstood and defending his actions - even smiling. They
obviously think they have it “sewn up” and they probably have. Some
one has to be respomsib;e for education (if it can be called that) in
County Durham; it is just a pity that integrity and an ethical
conscience do not appear to be among the criteria required for the
role.

1.

Sili said,

October 4, 2008 at 8:51 pm

Thank you, bob sterman.

I think I’ve partly misunderstood what the HD is, and partly expressed
myself badly.

There is some kind of provision in the law against experimentation on
people (and for that matter animals) without ethical approval, isn’t
there?

Or is it nothing but guidelines and professional contracts? I know
Wakefield stands before the GMC and not a court, but still … Does this
mean that it’s only a problem if a registered doctor does it, while
Joe Q. Public can go ahead and do as he pleases?

1.

McCruiskeen said,

October 13, 2008 at 4:11 pm

Episode 6 of my Blog (David Ford Replies to Me) is now available.

http://maccruiskeen@wordpress.com

1.

DrFred said,

October 14, 2008 at 1:47 am

Just thought I’d share a bit of similar test improvement foolishness
from across the pond. Today I was given a package of mint chewing gum
to share with my students to ‘improve their performance’ on their
NECAP tests required under the NCLB mandates.

This evening, while searching for other examples of ‘Dumbo’s feather’
in education, I stumbled on an on-line study run by the Univ. of
Northumbria psychology department to assess the effect of Omega 3/Fish
Oil on memory performance.
(Link is: www.omega3research.org.uk)
I decided to participate in the study, playing both parent and child
roles. I proceeded to the end, wondering when I would be asked for
some type of validating information. I know you’ll never guess - there
was none! The only potential trap might have been when I selected a
weight and height for my 14 year old child - couldn’t remember what a
stone was equal to in pounds - had to spend a moment looking it up.

In any case, I’m sure this study’s results will someday be publicized,
yet it’s results are totally bogus. Any idiot, including this 62 year
old Vermont chemistry teacher, can participate!

Keep up the great work exposing bad science!

1.

McCruiskeen said,

October 14, 2008 at 12:21 pm

Chapter 7 of my blog is now available at:

maccruiskeen.wordpress.com

(Sorry about the earlier mistyped link!)

Chapter 8 (in a couple of weeks) will be about the questions I asked
in the DCC council chamber and DCC’s pathetic response(s)!

Post a Comment

You must bee logged in to post a comment.

Ported to Wordpress by Kaushal Sheth design by Arcsin Sponsored by Web
Hosting
