Bad Science

Pages

• Home
• What You Can Find Here
• About Dr Ben Goldacre
• Audio and Video
• Bad Science Shop
• Buy the Book
• Press and Media Contacts
• Send In Your Bad Science!
• Subscribe To Bad Science
• Support This Site
• The Bad Science Forums
• The Rules
• What is the MiniBlog?
• Recommended Reading

Podcast

BadScienceLinks

Subscribe

email address:

XML del.icio.us Digg it reddit Google StumbleUpon

Archives

• October 2008
• September 2008
• August 2008
• July 2008
• June 2008
• May 2008
• April 2008
• March 2008
• February 2008
• January 2008
• December 2007
• November 2007
• October 2007
• September 2007
• August 2007
• July 2007
• June 2007
• May 2007
• April 2007
• March 2007
• February 2007
• January 2007
• December 2006
• November 2006
• October 2006
• September 2006
• August 2006
• July 2006
• June 2006
• May 2006
• April 2006
• March 2006
• February 2006
• January 2006
• December 2005
• November 2005
• October 2005
• September 2005
• August 2005
• July 2005
• June 2005
• May 2005
• April 2005
• March 2005
• February 2005
• January 2005
• December 2004
• November 2004
• October 2004
• September 2004
• August 2004
• July 2004
• June 2004
• May 2004
• April 2004
• March 2004
• February 2004
• January 2004
• December 2003
• November 2003
• October 2003
• September 2003
• August 2003
• July 2003
• June 2003
• May 2003
• April 2003
• February 2003
• July 2002
• August 1007
• January 1007

Meta

• Register
• Login
• RSS
• Comments RSS
• Valid XHTML
• XFN

Recently Commented

• Bad Science teaching resources for schools
• Dope on a rope
• Nice review of my book in the British Medical Journal by Richard
Smith
• More crap journals?
• Generous review of my book in the Daily Telegraph
•"There is a plague of Jellyfish off the coast of Spain as reported in
the Guardian this week. Ben, why not take a holiday there this year."
• Haha w00t I am"Health Book Of The Week" in the Daily Mail

Search

•

The Book, now in stock at Amazon.

T-shirts

Categories

• adverts (41)
• africa (16)
• alternative medicine (174)

• acupuncture (5)
• herbal remedies (19)
• homeopathy (46)
• nutritionists (83)

• bad science (462)
• badscience (11)
• BANT (1)
• book (4)
• book reviews (3)
• brain gym (10)
• brainiac (6)
• cash-for-"stories" (11)
• celebs (13)
• chocolate (6)
• climate change (5)
• competing interests (2)
• cosmetics (13)
• craig sams (2)
• dangers (26)
• danie krugel (1)
• death (4)
• detox (5)
• dna (8)
• dore (3)
• drurrrgs (8)
• electrosensitivity (20)
• equazen (13)
• evolutionary psychology (4)
• fish oil (19)
• fuel pr (1)
• geek (1)
• gillian mckeith (24)
• gm (2)
• hate mail (7)
• heroes (3)
• heroes of bad science (3)
• Hi-Fi (2)
• history of quackery (2)
• ID (1)
• ions (5)
• journal club (14)
• laws (2)
• letters (18)
• magnets (20)
• manufacturing doubt (1)
• matthias rath (8)
• media (127)

• bbc (31)
• channel 4 (11)
• channel five (4)
• evening standard (4)
• express (17)
• independent (17)
• ITV (6)
• mail (40)
• mirror (13)
• news of the world (1)
• sun (5)
• telegraph (22)
• times (34)

• medicalisation (12)
• MiniBlog (1)
• miracles (2)
• MMR (34)
• mondo academico (2)
• MRSA (6)
• nanniebots (3)
• neurostuff (2)
• new scientist (4)
• not bad science (8)
• onanism (37)
• oxygen (9)
• patrick holford (14)
• penises (6)
• perpetual motion (3)
• PhDs, doctors, and qualifications (33)
• phone stalking (4)
• placebo (18)
• podcast (6)
• postmodernist bollocks (6)
• powerwatch - alasdair philips (9)
• pr guff (1)
• procrastination (1)
• pseudodiagnoses (1)
• psychic nonsense (1)
• psychology of woo (1)
• publication bias (2)
• qlink (1)
• quantum physics (12)
• references (55)
• regulating nonsense (2)
• regulating research (18)
• religion (23)
• roger coghill (2)
• roland kapferer (2)
• scare stories (48)
• secret data (2)
• space (4)
• statistics (58)
• stifling criticism (8)
• survey data (1)
• teaching resources (1)
• toys (1)
• very basic science (52)
• water (18)
• weight loss (10)

Posse

•?added=true
• Ambriguous
• Amoebic Vodka
• Apathy Sketchpad
• Apothecary's Drawer
• Architectures of Control:: Design with Intent
• Away from the bench
• Azimov
• B3ta
• Bad Homeopathy
• BadChemist
• BPS RESEARCH DIGEST
• BreathSpa
• BrokenHut
• Butterflies&Wheels
• Confessions of an Aca/Fan
• Confessions of an Aca/Fan: \"What is Remix Culture?\": An Interview
with Total Recut\'s Owen Gallagher (Part One)
• Denialism
• DrAust
• EducationWatch
• Exclaims
• Exploiting the desire for order:: Architectures of Control | Design
with Intent
• Gaylard
• Gimpy
• Hawk/Handsaw
• Headspace: Dogwatch corner
• Healthwatch
• Holfordmyths.org
• HolfordWatch
• LabLit
• Language Log
• Left Brain Right Brain
• Letting Off Steam
• Lifehacker
• Lifehacker, tips and downloads for getting things done?added=true
• Mike Stanton
• Mind Hacks
• Ministry of Truth
• Ministry of Truth
• monochrom
• Not Exactly Rocket Science
• Orac
• PharmaGossip
• PoorPothecary
• Prof David Colquhoun's"Improbable Science"
• Pyjamasinbananas
• PZ Myers
• Quackometer
• Quackwatch
• Ratbags.com
• SciencePunk
• Scientific Misconduct Blog
• Scientific Misconduct Blog?added=true
• Shpalman
• Skeptobot
• Spyblog
• Steinsky
• Teek
• Teek
• The Guardian
• Thinking Is Dangerou
• Twonilblankblank
• Valueaddedwater
• War On Error
• WFMU Oddmusic
• What is Ben reading?
• xkcd

The Medicalisation of Everyday Life

September 1st, 2008 by Ben Goldacre in medicalisation, fish oil,
equazen, adverts, celebs, alternative medicine, nutritionists, bad
science |

As the pace of medical innovation slows to a crawl, how do drug
companies stay in profit? By ‘discovering’ new illnesses to fit
existing products. But, says Ben Goldacre, in the second extract from
his new book, for many problems the cure will never be found in a
pill.

Ben Goldacre
The Guardian
Monday September 1 2008

When you’ve been working with bullshit for as long as I have, you
start to spot recurring themes: quacks and the pharmaceutical industry
use the exact same tricks to sell their pills, everybody loves a
“science bit” - even if it’s wrong - and when people introduce
pseudoscience into any explanation, it’s usually because there’s
something else they’re trying desperately not to talk about. But my
favourite is this: alternative therapists, the media, and the drug
industry all conspire to sell us reductionist, bio-medical
explanations for problems that might more sensibly and constructively
be thought of as social, political, or personal. And this
medicalisation of everyday life isn’t done to us; in fact, we eat it
up.

In 2007 the British Medical Journal published a large, well-conducted,
randomised controlled trial, performed at lots of different locations,
run by publicly funded scientists, that delivered a strikingly
positive result: it showed that one treatment could significantly
improve children’s antisocial behaviour. The treatment was entirely
safe, and the study was even accompanied by a very compelling
cost-effectiveness analysis.

Did this story get reported as front-page news in the Daily Mail,
natural home of miracle cures (and sinister hidden scares)? Was it
followed up on the health pages, with an accompanying photo feature,
describing one child’s miraculous recovery, and an interview with an
attractive happy mother with whom we could all identify?

No. This story was unanimously ignored by the entire British news
media, despite their preoccupation with antisocial behaviour, school
performance and miracle cures, for one very simple reason: the
research was not about a pill. It was about a cheap, practical
parenting programme.

Meanwhile, for over five years now, newspapers and television stations
have tried to persuade us, with “science”, that fish-oil pills have
been proven to improve children’s school performance, IQ, behaviour,
attention, and more. As I have documented with almost farcical
repetitiveness in this paper, these

so-called “fish-oil trials” were so badly designed that they amounted
to little more than a sham. In the case of the biggest, “the Durham
trial”, the county council has refused even to release the results,
which I have every reason to believe were unflattering.

I’m not desperately interested in whether fish-oil capsules improve
children’s IQ, and I say this for a number of reasons. Firstly, I’m
not a consumer journalist, or a lifestyle guru, and I am not in the
business of handing out “readers’ health advice”. Also, if you think
about it rationally, any beneficial effects of fish oil on school
performance will probably not be all that dramatic. We do not have an
epidemic of thick vegetarians, and humans have shown themselves to be
as versatile as their diets are diverse, from Alaska to the Sinai
desert.

But I wouldn’t start with molecules, or pills, as a solution to these
kinds of problems. The capsules Durham are promoting cost 80p per
child per day, while it spends only 65p per child per day on school
meals, so you might start there. Or you might restrict junk-food
advertising to children, as the government has recently done. You
might look at education and awareness about food and diet, as Jamie
Oliver recently did very well, without recourse to dodgy pseudoscience
or miracle pills.

But you might also step away from obsessing over food just for once
and look at parenting skills, teacher recruitment and retention,
orsocial exclusion, or classroom size, or social inequality and the
widening income gap. Or parenting programmes, as we said right at the
beginning. In fact, Durham’s GCSE results, where the “trial” was
performed, improved far more in the year before the fish-oil pills
were introduced, after a huge input of extra funding and, more
importantly, extra effort from local teachers and the community. But
the media don’t report stories like that: because “pill solves complex
social problem”, even if it’s not true, is a much better angle.

The fish-oil story is by no means unique: repeatedly, in a bid to sell
pills, people sell a wider explanatory framework, and as George Orwell
first noted, the true genius in advertising is to sell you the
solution and the problem. Pharmaceutical companies with serotonergic
antidepressant drugs to sell have worked hard, in their
direct-to-consumer advertisements and their lobbying, to push the
“serotonin hypothesis” for depression - the idea that low serotonin
causes low mood - even though the scientific evidence for this theory
is growing thinner every year. Meanwhile the nutrition supplements
industry promotes dietary deficiencies as their treatable cause for
low mood.

But this fish-oil story is also a classic example of a phenomenon more
widely described as “medicalisation”, the expansion of the biomedical
remit into domains where it may not be helpful or necessary. In the
past, commentators have portrayed this as something that doctors
inflict on a passive and unsuspecting world, an expansion of the
medical empire; in reality, it seems that these reductionist
biomedical stories can appeal to us all, because complex problems
often have depressingly complex causes, and the solutions can be
taxing and unsatisfactory.

In its most aggressive form, this process has been characterised as
“disease-mongering”. It can be seen throughout the world of quack
cures - and being alive to it is like having the scales removed from
your eyes - but to understand its relevance to the pharmaceutical
industry, we need a quick primer in medical history.

Before 1935 doctors were basically useless. We had insulin, morphine
for pain relief - a drug with superficial charm, at least - and we
could do operations fairly cleanly, although with huge doses of
anaesthetics, because we hadn’t yet sorted out well-targeted
muscle-relaxant drugs. Then suddenly, between the 1930s and the 1970s,
science poured out an almost constant stream of miracle cures.

Everything we associate with modern medicine happened in that time:
antibiotics, dialysis, transplants, intensive-care units, heart
surgery, every drug you’ve ever heard of, and more. For people who
were ill, the difference was spectacular. If you got TB in the 1920s
you died, pale and emaciated, in the style of a romantic poet. If you
got TB in the 1970s, then in all likelihood you would live to a ripe
old age. You might have to take rifampicin and isoniazid for months on
end - they’re not nice drugs, and the side-effects make your eyeballs
and urine turn pink - but if all goes well you will live to see
inventions unimaginable in your childhood.

Times have changed. The pharmaceutical industry is in trouble: the
golden age of medicine has creaked to a halt, the low-hanging fruit of
medical research has all been harvested, and the industry is rapidly
running out of new drugs. Fifty “novel molecular entities” a year were
registered in the 1990s, but now it’s down to 20, and many of those
are just copies of other companies’ products, changed only enough to
justify a new patent. So the story of “disease mongering” goes like
this: because they cannot find new treatments for the diseases we
already have, the pill companies have instead had to invent new
diseases for the treatments they already have.

Recent favourites include social anxiety disorder (a new use for SSRI
antidepressant drugs), female sexual dysfunction (a new use for Viagra
in women), the widening diagnostic boundaries of “restless leg
syndrome”, and of course “night eating syndrome” (another attempt to
sell SSRI medication, bordering on self-parody) to name just a few:
all problems, in a very real sense, but perhaps not necessarily the
stuff of pills, and perhaps not all best viewed in reductionist
biomedical terms. In fact, you might consider that reframing
intelligence, loss of libido, shyness and tiredness as medical pill
problems is a crass, exploitative, and frankly disempowering act.

Selling us crude biomedical mechanisms may well enhance the placebo
benefits from pills, but these stories are also seductive precisely
because of what they edit out. In the media coverage around the
rebranding of Viagra as a treatment for women in the early noughties,
and the invention of female sexual dysfunction, for example, it wasn’t
just the tablets that were being sold: it was the explanation.

Glossy magazines told stories about couples with relationship problems
who went to their GP, and the GP didn’t understand their problem (the
first paragraph of any medical story in the media). Then they went to
the specialist, and he didn’t help either. But then they went to a
private clinic. Here they did blood tests - hormone profiles, esoteric
imaging studies of clitoral bloodflow - and then they understood. The
solution was in a pill, but that was only half the story, and the
diagnosis was almost more important: she had a mechanical problem
Rarely was there a mention of any other factors, that she was feeling
tired from overwork, that he was exhausted from being a new father, or
finding it hard to come to terms with the fact that his wife was now
the milky mother of his children, and no longer the nubile sex vixen
he first snogged on the floor of the student union building to the
sound of Don’t You Want Me? by the Human League in 1983.

This is because we don’t want to talk about these issues, any more
than we want to talk about social inequality, the disintegration of
local communities, the breakdown of the family, the impact of
employment uncertainty, changing expectations and notions of
personhood, or any of the other complex, difficult factors that play
into the apparent rise of antisocial behaviour in schools.

This wishful deafness to the clamour of reality reaches its purest
form in our newfound obsession with food, as if it was the most
important lifestyle risk factor for ill health, as if every technical
detail should be devoured and acted on, for the promise of eternal
zest. From the Daily Mail’s ongoing project to divide all the
inanimate objects in the world into ones that either cause or cure
cancer, to daytime television’s obsession with the healing power of
this week’s magic berry, there is no end to this material. Should you
believe it? No. I have demonstrated time and again how these claims
are flawed in their own specific cases. But something more interesting
is being ignored in the background.

The World Health Organisation’s Commission on the Social Determinants
of Health reported this week, and it contained some chilling figures.
Life expectancy in the poorest area of Glasgow - Calton - is 28 years
less than in Lenzie, a middle-class area just eight miles away. That
is a lot less life, and it isn’t just because the people in Lenzie are
careful to eat goji berries for extra antioxidants, and a handful of
brazil nuts every day, thus ensuring they’re not deficient in
selenium, as per nutritionists’ advice.

People die at different rates because of a complex nexus of
interlocking social and political issues including work life,
employment status, social stability, family support, housing, smoking,
drugs, and possibly diet, although the evidence on that, frankly, is
pretty thin, and you certainly wouldn’t start there.

But we do, because it’s such a delicious fantasy, because it’s
commodifiable and pushed by expert PR agencies, and in some respects
this is one of the most destructive features of the whole nutritionist
project, graphically exemplified by figures such as Dr Gillian McKeith
PhD. Food has become a distraction from the real causes of ill health,
and also, in some respects, a manifesto of rightwing individualism.
You are what you eat, and people die young because they deserve it.
You hear it from people as they walk past the local council estate and
point at a mother feeding her child crisps: “Well, when you look at
what they feed them,” they say, “it’s got to be diet, hasn’t it?” They
choose death, through ignorance and laziness, but you choose life,
fresh fish, olive oil, and that’s why you’re healthy. You’re going to
see 80. You deserve it. Not like them.

Genuine public-health interventions to address the social and
lifestyle causes of disease are far less lucrative, and far less of a
spectacle, than anything a lifestyle magazine editor or television
commissioner would dare to touch. What prime-time TV show looks at
food deserts created by giant supermarket chains, the very companies
with which the stellar media nutritionists so often have their
lucrative commercial contracts? What glossy magazine focuses on how
social inequality drives health inequality? Where’s the human interest
in prohibiting the promotion of bad foods, facilitating access to
healthier foods by means of taxation, or maintaining a clear labelling
system?

There is no glamour in “enabling environments” that naturally promote
exercise, or urban planning measures that prioritise cyclists,
pedestrians and public transport over the car. There are no votes, it
seems, in reducing the ever-increasing inequality between senior
executive and shop-floor pay. When do you ever hear about elegant
ideas like “walking school buses”? Somewhere near you, a softly spoken
public-health official has probably tried to interest your local paper
in a story on them; presumably the latest urgent food-fad news left no
space.

We love this stuff. It isn’t done to us, we invite it, and we buy it,
because we want to live in a simple universe of rules with justice,
easy answers and predictable consequences. We want pills to solve
complex social problems like school performance. We want berries to
stop us from dying and to delineate the difference between us and the
lumpen peasants around us. We want nice simple stories that make sense
of the world.nd if you make us think about anything else more
complicated, we will open our mouths, let out a bubble or two, and
float off - bored and entirely unphased - to huddle at the other end
of our shiny little fishbowl eating goji berries.

This is an edited extract from Bad Science by Ben Goldacre, published
by Fourth Estate today at £12.99. To order a copy for £10.99 with free
p&p, call 0870 836 0875 or visit guardianbookshop.co.uk

You can also buy it from Amazon for £6.49, and I recommend doing so,
because the price might go up later, and then you’d feel a right
charlie. At least you can give it to your local headteacher/quack/MP
if you don’t like it.

del.icio.us Digg it reddit Google StumbleUpon Slashdot It!

43 Responses

1.

macker said,

September 1, 2008 at 8:00 am

What was the simple practical parenting programme that the papers
didn’t cover?

1.

muscleman said,

September 1, 2008 at 8:04 am

Well said Ben, this needs saying and saying lots and in the no holds
barred terms you use. Hear! hear!

NB one small point: it is fazed, not phased so hence it whould have
been unfazed. For the second edition

1.

Dudley said,

September 1, 2008 at 8:18 am

Also “As I have documented with almost farcical repetitiveness in this
paper” seems odd if the book isn;t just a clippings job.

1.

pseudomonas said,

September 1, 2008 at 9:27 am

macker: http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/abstract/334/7595/678

1.

ayupmeduck said,

September 1, 2008 at 9:45 am

Wow. This is nearly politics Ben. Actually, there’s more real politics
here than you will hear from your average MP.

If you can now figure out how the UK can get out of the monetary
policy Cul-de-sac, you’ll get my vote for the next PM

1.

electric_wizard said,

September 1, 2008 at 10:20 am

” Also “As I have documented with almost farcical repetitiveness in
this paper” seems odd if the book isn;t just a clippings job. ”

Rumbled.

1.

John Smith said,

September 1, 2008 at 10:34 am

I don’t think this is about wanting the world to make sense. You may
be reading a little of your own personality into that analysis.

This is about people feeling like they’re out of control, and people’s
reaction to unalterable fate. It’s about superstition, really.

People who work in professions where they believe they have no control
over the outcome tend to be the most superstitious. Examples include
coal miners, who perform all kinds of rituals before going
underground, because the mine might explode. They see this as outside
of their ability to do anything about it. Sports people are also very
superstitious and again, this is because they believe they have no
control over the outcome of the game.

If we believe we believe we have no control over an outcome, we tend
to be superstitious. If we have no firm foundation of belief, we go a
little crazy. All you have to do to control people is confuse them a
little bit, and, as they flap about searching for truth, guide them
where you want them to go.

What all the health scares have actually done is confused people into
believing they have no control over their lives or their own
well-being. And THAT’s why they believe popping pills can cure
everything, including “syndromes” that don’t actually exist. In past
societies, they might have performed a rain dance, or made a poultice
out of eggs, chicken feathers and tar. Now we take a gelatine-coated
pill. But there’s no real difference.

In some ways, medical doctors are guilty of propagating this. Doctors
make no effort to explain WHY a pill works. Most doctors don’t even
explain what they’re prescribing. Instead, from the patient’s point of
view, they’re given a magical ticket, that they present to a shaman (a
chemist), who then gives them magical food they must swallow that
clears up their strep throat or make them stop feeling so depressed.
They may as well touch wood every hour, or take a pill full of fish
oil…

Doctors should work harder to explain what they’re doing, even if the
patient is resistant (and I realise that most are) That should be part
of a diagnosis session—an essential element of bedside manner. “You
must understand what I am telling you.”

Once that’s done, people will be more resistant to quack cures, and
made-up illnesses, because they will feel they are in control.

This is the big difference between now and 50 years ago. 50 years ago
we felt we knew what was what. If you had a cold, you drank lemon and
whiskey, and stayed in bed. You walked daily and ate an apple a day
because “it’s good for the constitution”. We had a definite idea of
what was good for us, even if sometimes it was off the mark. Nowadays
we have no concrete idea of what’s good for us. One report says wine
will slowly kills us. Another says that a glass a day will stop us
dying of a heart attack. One report says fast food will kill us.
Another says that a Big Mac a week is actually good for us. MMR jab?
Good for our kids. Bad for our kids. Confusion reigns. Doctors sit
idly by, smug in their ivory towers, with their head in order, and
baffled as to why everybody elses’ head isn’t in order.

Ben, I think your analysis is very astute but you’re not looking at
the bigger picture. You’re only looking at immediate cause and effect,
and drawing divinations from that. The bigger picture is about the
nature of humanity, and how we respond to knowledge (and the lack of
it). This is perhaps one of the biggest issues of our time as we have
more and more knowledge, thanks partially to the Internet, but also
thanks to the fact we’re living in a sci-fi universe when pretty much
everything is possible.

1.

John Smith said,

September 1, 2008 at 10:43 am

Quote: “[the father is] finding it hard to come to terms with the fact
that his wife was now the milky mother of his children”

OK, you HAVE GOT to get t-shirts made with “I’m a milky mother” on.
Get them made in XXXL size. Pregnant women will snap them up. It
sounds like I’m being flippant but, actually, I’m serious. You might
be onto something.

Get ones made for husbands—ones like the old “I’m with stupid”
t-shirts. An arrow pointing left or right, with the words, “I’m with
this milky mother.”

Also, I suggest a range of greetings cards for fathers to send to
their wives on the birth of a new child: “Thank you for being the
milky mother of my children”.

1.

A Geek Tragedy said,

September 1, 2008 at 12:00 pm

Have you forgotten that you are meant to be a shill for big pharma.
The homeopaths on CIF remind you often enough.

1.

gadgeezer said,

September 1, 2008 at 12:04 pm

Macker, it is probably this paper about parenting and Sure Start.

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 1, 2008 at 1:06 pm

“The reigning myth of today is that the evils of society can all be
understood as evils of impersonality, alienation, and coldness. The
sum of these is an ideology of intimacy that transmutates political
categories into psychological categories. “Richard Sennett: The Fall
of Public Man.

Alternative myths abound, relevant to this debate though: the
depoliticisation of health (ooh, and the environment) by transmutation
(great word) into the technological [is a reigning myth]

In other words, the onus is on scientist to fix political problems, so
that when they (frequently) fail, they get the blame.

1.

PhilEdwards said,

September 1, 2008 at 1:31 pm

“We want pills to solve complex social problems like school
performance. We want berries to stop us from dying and to delineate
the difference between us and the lumpen peasants around us.”

Bravo.

1.

used to be jdc said,

September 1, 2008 at 1:40 pm

“Also “As I have documented with almost farcical repetitiveness in
this paper” seems odd if the book isn’t just a clippings job.”

Rumbled.

Heh - not if the Guardian article is an edited extract from the book
and the actual book does not include that line. I’ll have to remember
to check that later.

1.

BobP said,

September 1, 2008 at 3:48 pm

It’s not just a verbatim extract from the book - he has referred to
the WHO report which was published on 28 August.

1.

sideshowjim said,

September 1, 2008 at 4:12 pm

I’m sorry, “Dr” Gillian Mckeith “PHD”? A typo, surely…

1.

mrhunnybun said,

September 1, 2008 at 6:09 pm

How come Amazon is still showing your book as a pre-order Ben? Is it
not released today?

I was hoping to get it for tomorrow from them, At this rate I may have
to visit a SHOP. Horror!

1.

Picklish said,

September 1, 2008 at 11:35 pm

@ John Smith
Many people can be superstitious because they confused by the plethora
of advice that is out there, but again there is the danger of
simplfying the problem, of simplfying people. Saying that is surely
giving a simple answer to a complex question?

But i agree that education must be the key to helping people, on all
levels of the social strata. Doctors and teachers of course play a
role in this, but with so many people relying on the media for their
knowledge of the world, a large step towards helping people to
understand facts and rational thinking is journalists with
accreditation in the subjects they write about.

Which is exactly why we need mass media journalists like Ben,because
as a society we still haven’t moved to using the internet objectively
as our main source of information. It’s getting better though. The
kids of today won’t even bother reading the Guardian or the Mail in
the future. Well, we can only hope…

1.

peterd102 said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:18 am

” You might look at education and awareness about food and diet, as
Jamie Oliver recently did very well, without recourse to dodgy
pseudoscience or miracle pills.”

Jamie oliver does promote pseudoscience - he advocates rocket with
sausages - ****.

Leave the kid to make their own minds on what to eat, give them the
info but dont force them.

1.

peterd102 said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:44 am

Quackometer has posted that ‘Bad Science is top of the most popular
books in science and nature -

http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/bestsellers/books/57/ref=pd_ts_zbs_b_57_more?&pf_rd_p=205108891&pf_rd_s=ri
ght-3&pf_rd_t=101&pf_rd_i=57&pf_rd_m=A3P5ROKL5A1OLE&pf_rd_r=1RWM0KA9A15FQ39DCZSW

The funniest thing is that at the time of posting this The Very Hungry
Catapillar was a no.4 - nostalgia there, brings a tear to my eye. That
book, sorry to say this Ben, will last a hell of a lot longer in the
public mind than yours, tough luck there mate.

1.

peterd102 said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:45 am

EDIT actually No.3 The god delusion was at 4 lol - only place youd
ever see the two next to each other

1.

notzed said,

September 2, 2008 at 8:03 am

From the first section of this article - could it be that you notice
these types of stories more because you’re looking out for them?
Anyway, just a thought.

What I’m really curious about is whether the patent system is stifling
progress in medical advances. There is currently a raging debate about
the problem of software patents - currently only a handful of
countries possess them, and none of the major players had to contend
with them when they were not major players. Software patents threaten
to increase the cost of software development and/or lock out competing
software from monopolised markets. Either way, it will have a major
negative effect on innovation and technological progress. The argument
from the big-wigs is that they need some compensation for their r&d
spending - but in reality they just want to monopolise their simple
ideas and lock out competitors and competing business models.

Medial patents tend to be seen as necessary investment protection
because of the cost associated with development and approval of drugs.
But does the patent system instead encourage the development of
‘paper-wealth’ and ‘innovation’ driven by the minor modification of a
drug so they can get a new patent? Does this encourage drug companies
to spend more on marketing than r&d?

Maybe we have come to the end of the road for major medical advances
for the time being - but is that a bad thing? Can we all live forever?
Then again, we have vaccines for some types of cancer now - for
example. Still, if we have come as far as we can, maybe it’s time for
some of the wind to be taken out of the drug companies sails. By
artificially inflating the worth of these companies - for example
through patents - they are also leeching money from other endeavours
which may further the human situation on this planet.

1.

BadlyShavedMonkey said,

September 2, 2008 at 8:47 am

“EDIT actually No.3 The god delusion was at 4 lol - only place youd
ever see the two next to each other”

Now it’s number one, but I can’t read it yet, because I’ve must finish
the number 2 bestseller “IEE On-site Guide; BS 7671: 2008 IEE Wiring
Regulations 17th Edition”. There was a thrilling cliffhanger at the
end of the 16th edition.

Mmm…can’t wait.

1.

gantlord said,

September 2, 2008 at 11:41 am

Unphased indeed! I considered not buying your book for a moment. Just
a moment though. No 11. in all books!

1.

kim said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:13 pm

Actually, if you look in the dictionary, you’ll see that “phased” is
an acceptable (if unusual) alternative to “fazed”.

1.

gantlord said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:27 pm

Really? I looked in my favoured dictionary and it wasn’t there. I
thought I’d best look before flaming! Anyway, I’ll take your word for
it though and stand corrected. Which dictionary you using?

1.

Diotima said,

September 2, 2008 at 2:04 pm

Ben ‘lumpen’ means ragged, you clearly intended to write ‘lumpish’. On
SSRIs–when are you going to go head to head with Lewis Wolpert (no
mean scientist) on this?

1.

chltx said,

September 2, 2008 at 3:35 pm

Hmmm… I think diet *is* important for health and longevity. More
important than exercise, but probably less important than getting
enough sleep.

I achieved some major (and dramatic) improvements in my health by
simply banning sugar and grains from my diet, and eating more very
rare beef, fish, and raw veggies. However, it’s a bit tough to make
any money off of that particular program… ’specially since I just gave
away most of my dietary ’secrets’ for free.

1.

allshallbewell said,

September 2, 2008 at 11:25 pm

“Ben ‘lumpen’ means ragged, you clearly intended to write ‘lumpish’”

Ben’s referring to the ‘lumpenproletariat’ but obviously substituted
‘peasant’ for ‘proletariat’ because Guardian readers won’t be familiar
with Marx.

1.

mwitthoft said,

September 3, 2008 at 4:37 am

There are problems with overmarketing of drugs, but restless leg
syndrome is not a good example. Rather the opposite, in fact: RLS is a
horrid disease, easily treated with the right pill, not amenable to
any other known treatment, and — until the recent advertising frenzy —
underdiagnosed and often incorrectly treated or not treated at all.
You try to salvage the wobbly case for RLS as disease-mongering by
redirecting to ‘the widening diagnostic boundaries’ (whatever THAT is
supposed to mean). A better approach would have been to admit RLS as a
counterexample to your thesis, and then draw what lessons you could
from that.

1.

RS said,

September 3, 2008 at 12:28 pm

I argued with Ben before on the question of social phobia, restless
legs and female sexual dysfunction.

Try searching for what he had to say.

1.

pv said,

September 3, 2008 at 3:05 pm

chltx said,

September 2, 2008 at 3:35 pm

Hmmm… I think diet *is* important for health and longevity. More
important than exercise, but probably less important than getting
enough sleep.

I achieved some major (and dramatic) improvements in my health by
simply banning sugar and grains from my diet, and eating more very
rare beef, fish, and raw veggies. However, it’s a bit tough to make
any money off of that particular program… ’specially since I just gave
away most of my dietary ’secrets’ for free.

You don’t say from what state your improvement started.
It’s worthwhile looking at what people do in other parts of the world
where they live longer and healthier on average than in the UK. And
rather than only look at what people eat, also look at what they don’t
eat.
I’ve often heard it said, by my English friends, of my adopted home of
Italy that it’s the “Mediterranean” diet that makes all the
difference. This is something they say without actually taking the
trouble to observe how people really live.
Fish is a good example. It’s very expensive here and in most of Italy
people don’t eat lots of fish - small amounts, and only sometimes. I
don’t observe lots of people eating nuts by the bucket load either.
Italians eat lots of pasta, rice, tomatoes, simple salads of whatever
is in season locally, olive oil and mustn’t forget pizza, coffee and
wine. Italians don’t consume so much milk or butter or anything like
the amount of pre-prepared, pre-packaged food that the British are so
happy to pay through the nose for. And eating tends to be a sociable
activity usually done sitting down with family or friends. There is
also a definite relationship between drinking alcohol (wine, say) and
eating. Going for a drink after work, especially without any food,
isn’t a popular activity.
Exercise is the other thing, although not necessarily as a regime
separate from other daily activity. It is vastly underrated and costs
next to nothing. The number of older and younger people who have
cycled all their live as a primary means of local transport ( not
because it’s a fad or they want everyone to know they are saving the
planet). 29% go swimming regularly - every town seems to have a
swimming pool or two where you can stay all day if you want at little
cost. Municipal sports facilities are commonplace. Funnily enough
there’s not much in the way of sports at school. Football, rugby,
volleyball, basketball, swimming, cycle racing, athletics etc., all
things Italians are keen on, are done outside and after school.

Longevity and good health are complicated. The idea that they can all
be reduced to a medical problem to be resolved by taking pills is
crass. I agree very much with Ben Goldacre that it is disempowering.
However, even though the nutrition, pill and sCAM businesses are
fundamentally exploitative in the worst ways, and wouldn’t exist if
the punters weren’t so ill-informed, some responsibility has to lay
with the punters themselves for being lazy, not taking responsibility
or avoiding reality. The country’s democratically elected
representatives also bear a deal of responsibility for not taking
education seriously (outside its uses for commerce) and for not
creating a legal framework that effectively disempowers the worst of
the pill pushers and medicalisers.

1.

martine s said,

September 3, 2008 at 6:02 pm

“There are problems with overmarketing of drugs, but restless leg
syndrome is not a good example. Rather the opposite, in fact: RLS is a
horrid disease, easily treated with the right pill, not amenable to
any other known treatment, and — until the recent advertising frenzy —
underdiagnosed and often incorrectly treated or not treated at all.”

Yes, it’s not the first time Ben has targeted RLS unfairly. What’s
happening is just the opposite: a set of symptoms whose cause is
unknown (central nervous system) and afflicted people looking for a
cure.
“Easily treated”?: I wish it were.

1.

frontierpsychiatrist said,

September 3, 2008 at 9:21 pm

( asshellbewell, Lumpen means 1. marginalized, 2. not educated or
enlightened.)

It’s not just in the realm of medications that we see society being
medicalized. The number of mental health employees and classifications
for psychiatric disorders have mushroomed over the past decades.
Alongside this we see a professionalization of friends (counsellors)
and some neat excuses to avoid personal responsibility (sex addiction)

1.

mwitthoft said,

September 3, 2008 at 9:23 pm

–“Easily treated”?: I wish it were–

Neither Relpax nor Mirapex works for you? Ouch.

1.

mwitthoft said,

September 3, 2008 at 9:24 pm

–“Easily treated”?: I wish it were–

Neither Requip nor Mirapex works for you? Ouch.

1.

martine s said,

September 4, 2008 at 9:13 pm

“Neither Requip nor Mirapex works for you? Ouch.”

Unfortunately so. So if big pharma has anything remotely likely to
work, bring it on I say.

1.

kim said,

September 4, 2008 at 9:40 pm

gantlord - apologies, I can’t find that definition of “phase” in the
dictionary yet I’m sure it was there last time I looked! Er, must have
imagined it. Sorry.

BTW, agree with people about restless legs. A relative of mine
suffered from it for about 30 years before it was finally correctly
identified and treated. The drug treatments have worked very well for
him. I can’t comment on whether it is over-diagnosed, but the symptoms
are so very distinctive and unusual, I imagine it would be hard to
diagnose a case that didn’t exist.

1.

banshee said,

September 4, 2008 at 10:29 pm

Must agree with previous correspondants around medicalisation of life.
However there are people for whom these are disabling conditions.

Latest news from the European Congree on NeuroPsychoPharmacology held
over a few days recently in Barcelona - SNRIs and fibromyalgia! Plus
mGlu2/3 receptor antagonists, quetiapine for everything, depot
antipsychotics are back in vogue and pharmacogenomics/genetics have a
great future.

BTW the lovely weather, blue skies and hot sunshine - not to mention
the many lovely ladies just walking around in Barcelona - have lifted
my mood enormously from the grim, grey and damp summer skies in the
UK!

1.

peterd102 said,

September 5, 2008 at 12:39 pm

Enough of the Grammar Nazis please - “Lumpen is usually applied to
porridge”, “no its a type of pen”, there could be many meanings LEAVE
THE GRAMMAR ALONE.

run “sigh”

Medicalization may be a good thing, if we applied evidence based
reasoning the world might be a better place. We dont always take
medical advice, we weigh it up against the benifits of the lifestyle
we have. I know that certain foods may be bad for me, i still eat them
as i enjoy them and thats more important, I dont exercise for the same
reason.

I just listened to your podcast btw ben - you say you would allow
Boots to lie to their customers about the beneifts of homeopathy to
exploit the placebo effect. The trouble is i would prefer that doctors
are the only people who can perscribe a placebo and only with previous
aggrement by the patient to placebo treatment.
Id be rather annoyed if an gardener came in and said he would make my
plants grow faster and then do bugger all and proclaim ‘Your plants
are taller, they have grown faster, see…’

1.

Robert Carnegie said,

September 6, 2008 at 3:39 am

I think that a milky mother’s T-shirt will be identifiable without the
printed slogan.

I’m still quite sceptical about scepticism about the role of serotonin
in mental health, or at least the role of fiddling around with
serotonin. But an idea that’s just occurred to me is to suppose that
depression arguably consists of poor self mood management, and SSRI
treatment takes the brakes off your mood control completely and
compels you to improve your own mental discipline or go mad. Coming
out the other side, you can use your improved skills to cure yourself
- or you could do the same thing with talking instead of a drug.

But I’ve gone through drug treatment for depression twice, which kind
of torpedoes the theory. But the second episode was with my Mum
suffering fatal cancer (as it turned out) and elderly Dad needing
care, so maybe it was the advanced course in not letting it get you
down, that I needed, that time.

Still, this idea is probably unoriginal, and also just as reductive as
taking pills to sort yourself out in the first place.

1.

Diotima said,

September 10, 2008 at 2:42 pm

PV Ah! this is bella Italia where everything is just wonderful! Where
life expectancy for males is 78 years (UK 77) and females 83 (UK 82).
Good heavens what a remarkable effect pasta and regular swimming have.
And of course everyone, just everyone cycles everywhere (which
explains the appalling traffic jams in Rome and Milan). I think that
you are still seeing your ‘adopted country’ through rose-coloured
glasses.

1.

Qui said,

September 11, 2008 at 10:37 pm

“Some punters” just aren’t capable of understanding the real
information or even distinguishing what is real from what is hype. I
have no science background and find myself trying to work out who is
telling the truth. I need facts but the World is not interested in
such mundane matters. Scientists seem to find humour, or wealth, in
keeping alternative theories alive - perhaps this is the GSKs and ICIs
who pay the salaries rather than the scientists themselves?? Even our
beloved Govt touts the trendiest statistics and creates wonderful new
regulations or laws for our benefit (blind-siding us perhaps?)
Science-speak leaves me cold, so I resort to anecdotal evidence - not
the best but certainly something I can understand. I have the ability
to question what I read. There are lots of people who don’t. What help
do they have? Please don’t mock or reprimand the ‘punters’, after all
we are only human (and goji berries don’t taste that bad, little
squidgy perhaps, nice pink colour, make the muesli look interesting).

1.

projektleiterin said,

September 18, 2008 at 7:55 pm

Ben is getting upset about social injustice and its consequences - I
like that, it sounds genuine.

Post a Comment

You must bee logged in to post a comment.

Ported to Wordpress by Kaushal Sheth design by Arcsin Sponsored by Web
Hosting
