Bad Science

Pages

• Home
• What You Can Find Here
• About Dr Ben Goldacre
• Audio and Video
• Bad Science Shop
• Buy the Book
• Press and Media Contacts
• Send In Your Bad Science!
• Subscribe To Bad Science
• Support This Site
• The Bad Science Forums
• The Rules
• What is the MiniBlog?
• Recommended Reading

Podcast

BadScienceLinks

Subscribe

email address:

XML del.icio.us Digg it reddit Google StumbleUpon

Archives

• October 2008
• September 2008
• August 2008
• July 2008
• June 2008
• May 2008
• April 2008
• March 2008
• February 2008
• January 2008
• December 2007
• November 2007
• October 2007
• September 2007
• August 2007
• July 2007
• June 2007
• May 2007
• April 2007
• March 2007
• February 2007
• January 2007
• December 2006
• November 2006
• October 2006
• September 2006
• August 2006
• July 2006
• June 2006
• May 2006
• April 2006
• March 2006
• February 2006
• January 2006
• December 2005
• November 2005
• October 2005
• September 2005
• August 2005
• July 2005
• June 2005
• May 2005
• April 2005
• March 2005
• February 2005
• January 2005
• December 2004
• November 2004
• October 2004
• September 2004
• August 2004
• July 2004
• June 2004
• May 2004
• April 2004
• March 2004
• February 2004
• January 2004
• December 2003
• November 2003
• October 2003
• September 2003
• August 2003
• July 2003
• June 2003
• May 2003
• April 2003
• February 2003
• July 2002
• August 1007
• January 1007

Meta

• Register
• Login
• RSS
• Comments RSS
• Valid XHTML
• XFN

Recently Commented

• Bad Science teaching resources for schools
• Dope on a rope
• Nice review of my book in the British Medical Journal by Richard
Smith
• More crap journals?
• Generous review of my book in the Daily Telegraph
•"There is a plague of Jellyfish off the coast of Spain as reported in
the Guardian this week. Ben, why not take a holiday there this year."
• Haha w00t I am"Health Book Of The Week" in the Daily Mail

Search

•

The Book, now in stock at Amazon.

T-shirts

Categories

• adverts (41)
• africa (16)
• alternative medicine (174)

• acupuncture (5)
• herbal remedies (19)
• homeopathy (46)
• nutritionists (83)

• bad science (462)
• badscience (11)
• BANT (1)
• book (4)
• book reviews (3)
• brain gym (10)
• brainiac (6)
• cash-for-"stories" (11)
• celebs (13)
• chocolate (6)
• climate change (5)
• competing interests (2)
• cosmetics (13)
• craig sams (2)
• dangers (26)
• danie krugel (1)
• death (4)
• detox (5)
• dna (8)
• dore (3)
• drurrrgs (8)
• electrosensitivity (20)
• equazen (13)
• evolutionary psychology (4)
• fish oil (19)
• fuel pr (1)
• geek (1)
• gillian mckeith (24)
• gm (2)
• hate mail (7)
• heroes (3)
• heroes of bad science (3)
• Hi-Fi (2)
• history of quackery (2)
• ID (1)
• ions (5)
• journal club (14)
• laws (2)
• letters (18)
• magnets (20)
• manufacturing doubt (1)
• matthias rath (8)
• media (127)

• bbc (31)
• channel 4 (11)
• channel five (4)
• evening standard (4)
• express (17)
• independent (17)
• ITV (6)
• mail (40)
• mirror (13)
• news of the world (1)
• sun (5)
• telegraph (22)
• times (34)

• medicalisation (12)
• MiniBlog (1)
• miracles (2)
• MMR (34)
• mondo academico (2)
• MRSA (6)
• nanniebots (3)
• neurostuff (2)
• new scientist (4)
• not bad science (8)
• onanism (37)
• oxygen (9)
• patrick holford (14)
• penises (6)
• perpetual motion (3)
• PhDs, doctors, and qualifications (33)
• phone stalking (4)
• placebo (18)
• podcast (6)
• postmodernist bollocks (6)
• powerwatch - alasdair philips (9)
• pr guff (1)
• procrastination (1)
• pseudodiagnoses (1)
• psychic nonsense (1)
• psychology of woo (1)
• publication bias (2)
• qlink (1)
• quantum physics (12)
• references (55)
• regulating nonsense (2)
• regulating research (18)
• religion (23)
• roger coghill (2)
• roland kapferer (2)
• scare stories (48)
• secret data (2)
• space (4)
• statistics (58)
• stifling criticism (8)
• survey data (1)
• teaching resources (1)
• toys (1)
• very basic science (52)
• water (18)
• weight loss (10)

Posse

•?added=true
• Ambriguous
• Amoebic Vodka
• Apathy Sketchpad
• Apothecary's Drawer
• Architectures of Control:: Design with Intent
• Away from the bench
• Azimov
• B3ta
• Bad Homeopathy
• BadChemist
• BPS RESEARCH DIGEST
• BreathSpa
• BrokenHut
• Butterflies&Wheels
• Confessions of an Aca/Fan
• Confessions of an Aca/Fan: \"What is Remix Culture?\": An Interview
with Total Recut\'s Owen Gallagher (Part One)
• Denialism
• DrAust
• EducationWatch
• Exclaims
• Exploiting the desire for order:: Architectures of Control | Design
with Intent
• Gaylard
• Gimpy
• Hawk/Handsaw
• Headspace: Dogwatch corner
• Healthwatch
• Holfordmyths.org
• HolfordWatch
• LabLit
• Language Log
• Left Brain Right Brain
• Letting Off Steam
• Lifehacker
• Lifehacker, tips and downloads for getting things done?added=true
• Mike Stanton
• Mind Hacks
• Ministry of Truth
• Ministry of Truth
• monochrom
• Not Exactly Rocket Science
• Orac
• PharmaGossip
• PoorPothecary
• Prof David Colquhoun's"Improbable Science"
• Pyjamasinbananas
• PZ Myers
• Quackometer
• Quackwatch
• Ratbags.com
• SciencePunk
• Scientific Misconduct Blog
• Scientific Misconduct Blog?added=true
• Shpalman
• Skeptobot
• Spyblog
• Steinsky
• Teek
• Teek
• The Guardian
• Thinking Is Dangerou
• Twonilblankblank
• Valueaddedwater
• War On Error
• WFMU Oddmusic
• What is Ben reading?
• xkcd

The media’s MMR hoax

August 30th, 2008 by Ben Goldacre in badscience, MMR, bad science |

This is an extract from my new book “ Bad Science “, in the Guardian
today. It’s out on Monday: my recommendation is that you buy it, and
give it to someone who disagrees with you.

Ben Goldacre
The Guardian
Saturday August 30 2008

Dr Andrew Wakefield is in front of the General Medical Council on
charges of serious professional misconduct, his paper on 12 children
with autism and bowel problems is described as “debunked” - although
it never supported the conclusions ascribed to it - and journalists
have convinced themselves that his £435,643 fee from legal aid proves
that his research was flawed.

I will now defend the heretic Dr Andrew Wakefield.

The media are fingering the wrong man, and they know who should really
take the blame: in MMR, journalists and editors have constructed their
greatest hoax to date, and finally demonstrated that they can pose a
serious risk to public health. But there are also many unexpected
twists to learn from: the health journalists themselves were not at
fault, the scale of the bias in the coverage was greater than anybody
realised at the time, Leo Blair was a bigger player than Wakefield,
and it all happened much later than you think.

Before we begin, it’s worth taking a moment to look at vaccine scares
around the world, because I’m always struck by how circumscribed these
panics are. The MMR and autism scare, for example, is practically
non-existent outside Britain. But throughout the 1990s France was in
the grip of a scare that hepatitis B vaccine caused multiple
sclerosis.

In the US, the major vaccine fear has been around the use of a
preservative called thiomersal, although somehow this hasn’t caught on
here, even though that same preservative was used in Britain. In the
1970s there was a widespread concern in the UK, driven again by a
single doctor, that whooping-cough vaccine was causing neurological
damage.

What the diversity of these anti-vaccination panics helps to
illustrate is the way in which they reflect local political and social
concerns more than a genuine appraisal of the risk data, because if
the vaccine for hepatitis B, or MMR, is dangerous in one country, it
should be equally dangerous everywhere; and if those concerns were
genuinely grounded in the evidence, especially in an age of the rapid
propagation of information, you would expect the concerns to be
expressed by journalists everywhere. They’re not.

In 1998 Wakefield published his paper in the Lancet. It’s surprising
to see, if you go back to the original clippings, that the study and
the press conference were actually covered in a fairly metered
fashion, and also quite sparsely. The Guardian and the Independent
reported the story on their front pages, but the Sun ignored it
entirely, and the Daily Mail - home of the health scare, and now well
known as vigorous campaigners against vaccination - buried their first
MMR piece unobtrusively in the middle of the paper. There were only
122 articles mentioning the subject at all, in all publications, that
whole year.

This was not unreasonable. The study itself was fairly trivial, a
“case series report” of 12 people - essentially a collection of 12
clinical anecdotes - and such a study would only really be interesting
and informative if it described a rare possible cause of a rare
outcome. If everyone who went into space came back with an extra
finger, say, then that would be worth noting. For things as common as
MMR and autism, finding 12 people with both is entirely unspectacular.

But things were going to get much worse, and for some very interesting
reasons. In 2001 and 2002 the scare began to gain momentum. Wakefield
published a review paper in an obscure journal, questioning the safety
of the immunisation programme, although with no new evidence. He
published two papers on laboratory work using PCR (a technique used in
genetic fingerprinting) which claimed to show measles virus in tissue
samples from children with bowel problems and autism. These received
blanket media coverage.

The coverage rapidly began to deteriorate, in ways which now feel
familiar and predictable. Emotive anecdotes from distressed parents
were pitted against old men in corduroy with no media training. The
Royal College of General Practitioners press office not only failed to
speak clearly on the evidence, it also managed to dig up anti-MMR GPs
for journalists who rang in asking for quotes. Newspapers and
celebrities began to use the vaccine as an opportunity to attack the
government and the health service, and of course it was the perfect
story, with a charismatic maverick fighting against the system, a
Galileo-like figure. There were elements of risk, of awful personal
tragedy, and of course, the question of blame: whose fault was autism?

But the biggest public health disaster of all - which everyone misses
- was a sweet little baby called Leo. In December 2001 the Blairs were
asked if their infant son had been given the MMR vaccine, and refused
to answer, on the grounds that this would invade their child’s right
to privacy. This stance was not entirely unreasonable, but its
validity was somewhat undermined by Cherie Blair when she chose to
reveal Leo’s vaccination history, in the process of promoting her
autobiography, and also described the specific act of sexual
intercourse which conceived him.

And while most other politicians were happy to clarify whether their
children had had the vaccine, you could see how people might believe
the Blairs were the kind of family not to have their children
immunised: essentially, they had surrounded themselves with health
cranks. There was Cherie Blair’s closest friend and aide, Carole
Caplin, a new age guru and “life coach”. Cherie was reported to visit
Carole’s mum, Sylvia Caplin, a spiritual guru who was viciously
anti-MMR (”for a tiny child, the MMR is a ridiculous thing to do. It
has definitely caused autism,” she told the Mail). They were also
prominently associated with a new age healer called Jack Temple, who
offered crystal dowsing, homeopathy, neolithic-circle healing in his
suburban back garden, and some special breastfeeding technique which
he reckoned made vaccines unnecessary.

Whatever you believe about the Blairs’ relationships, this is what the
nation was thinking about when they refused to clarify whether they
had given their child the MMR vaccine.

The MMR scare has created a small cottage industry of media analysis.
In 2003 the Economic and Social Research Council published a paper on
the media’s role in the public understanding of science, which sampled
all the major science media stories from January to September 2002,
the peak of the scare. It found 32% of all the stories written in that
period about MMR mentioned Leo Blair, and Wakefield was only mentioned
in 25%: Leo Blair was a bigger figure in this story than Wakefield.

And this was not a passing trivial moment in a 10-year-long story.
2002 was in fact the peak of the media coverage, by a very long
margin. In 1998 there were only 122 articles on MMR. In 2002 there
were 1,257 (from here). MMR was the biggest science story that year,
the most likely science topic to be written about in opinion or
editorial pieces, it produced the longest stories of any science
subject, and was also by far the most likely to generate letters to
the press, so people were clearly engaging with the issue. MMR was the
biggest and most heavily covered science story for years.

It was also covered extremely badly, and largely by amateurs. Less
than a third of broadsheet reports in 2002 referred to the
overwhelming evidence that MMR is safe, and only 11% mentioned that it
is regarded as safe in the 90 other countries in which it is used.

While stories on GM food, or cloning, stood a good chance of being
written by specialist science reporters, with stories on MMR their
knowledge was deliberately sidelined, and 80% of the coverage was by
generalist reporters. Suddenly we were getting comment and advice on
complex matters of immunology and epidemiology from Nigella Lawson,
Libby Purves, Suzanne Moore and Carol Vorderman, to name only a few.
The anti-MMR lobby, meanwhile, developed a reputation for targeting
generalist journalists, feeding them stories, and actively avoiding
health or science correspondents.

Journalists are used to listening with a critical ear to briefings
from press officers, politicians, PR executives, salespeople,
lobbyists, celebrities and gossip-mongers, and they generally display
a healthy natural scepticism: but in the case of science, generalists
don’t have the skills to critically appraise a piece of scientific
evidence on its merits. At best, the evidence of these “experts” will
only be examined in terms of who they are as people, or perhaps who
they have worked for. In the case of MMR, this meant researchers were
simply subjected to elaborate smear campaigns.

The actual scientific content of stories was brushed over and replaced
with didactic statements from authority figures on either side of the
debate, which contributed to a pervasive sense that scientific advice
is somehow arbitrary, and predicated upon a social role - the “expert”
- rather than on empirical evidence.

Any member of the public would have had very good reason to believe
that MMR caused autism, because the media distorted the scientific
evidence, reporting selectively on the evidence suggesting that MMR
was risky, and repeatedly ignoring the evidence to the contrary. In
the case of the PCR data, the genetic fingerprinting information on
whether vaccine-strain measles virus could be found in tissue samples
of children with autism and bowel problems, this bias was, until a few
months ago, quite simply absolute. You will remember from earlier that
Wakefield co-authored two scientific papers - known as the “Kawashima
paper” and the “O’Leary paper” - claiming to have found such evidence,
and received blanket media coverage for them. But you may never even
have heard of the papers showing these to be probable false positives.

In the Journal of Medical Virology May March 2006 there was a paper by
Afzal et al, looking for measles RNA in children with regressive
autism after MMR vaccination, using tools so powerful they could
detect measles RNA down to single-figure copy numbers. It found no
evidence of the vaccine-strain measles RNA to implicate MMR. Nobody
wrote about this study, anywhere, in the British media (except for me
in my column).

This was not an isolated case. Another major paper was published in
the leading academic journal Pediatrics a few months later,
replicating the earlier experiments very closely, and in some respects
more carefully, also tracing out the possible routes by which a false
positive could have occurred. For this paper by D’Souza et al, like
the Afzal paper before it, the media were united in their silence. It
was covered, by my count, in only two places: my column, and a Reuters
news agency report. Nowhere else (although there was a post on the
lead researcher’s boyfriend’s blog where he talked about how proud he
was of his girlfriend). [EDITED to disambiguate]

Journalists like to call for “more research”: here it was, and it was
ignored. Did the media neglect to cover these stories because they
were bored of the story? Clearly not. Because in 2006, at exactly the
same time as they were unanimously refusing even to mention these
studies, they were covering an identical claim, using identical
experimental methodology: “US scientists back autism link to MMR” said
the Telegraph. “Scientists fear MMR link to autism” squealed the Mail.

What was this frightening new data? These scare stories were based on
a poster presentation, at a conference yet to occur, on research not
yet completed, by a man with a well-documented track record of
announcing research that never subsequently appears in an academic
journal. This time Dr Arthur Krigsman was claiming he had found
genetic material from vaccine-strain measles virus in some gut samples
from children with autism and bowel problems. If true, this would have
bolstered Wakefield’s theory, which by 2006 was lying in tatters. We
might also mention that Wakefield and Krigsman are doctors together at
Thoughtful House, a private autism clinic in the US.

Two years after making these claims, the study remains unpublished.

Nobody can read what Krigsman did in his experiment, what he measured,
or replicate it. Should anyone be surprised by this? No. Krigsman was
claiming in 2002 that he had performed colonoscopy studies on children
with autism and found evidence of harm from MMR, to universal
jubilation in the media, and this work remains entirely unpublished as
well. Until we can see exactly what he did, we can’t see whether there
may be flaws in his methods, as there are in all scientific papers, to
a greater or lesser extent: maybe he didn’t select the subjects
properly, maybe he measured the wrong things. If he doesn’t write it
up formally, we can never know, because that is what scientists do:
write papers, and pull them apart to see if their findings are robust.

Through reporting as shamelessly biased as this, British journalists
have done their job extremely well. People make health decisions based
on what they read in the newspapers, and MMR uptake has plummeted from
92% to 73%: there can be no doubt that the appalling state of health
reporting is now a serious public health issue. We have already seen a
mumps epidemic in 2005, and measles cases are at their highest levels
for a decade. But these are not the most chilling consequences of
their hoax, because the media are now queueing up to blame one man,
Wakefield, for their own crimes.

It is madness to imagine that one single man can create a 10-year
scare story. It is also dangerous to imply - even in passing - that
academics should be policed not to speak their minds, no matter how
poorly evidenced their claims. Individuals like Wakefield must be free
to have bad ideas. The media created the MMR hoax, and they maintained
it diligently for 10 years. Their failure to recognise that fact
demonstrates that they have learned nothing, and until they do,
journalists and editors will continue to perpetrate the very same
crimes, repeatedly, with increasingly grave consequences.

· This is an edited extract from Bad Science by Ben Goldacre,
published by Fourth Estate on September 1 at £12.99. To order a copy
for £10.99 with free p&p, call 0870 836 0875 or visit
guardianbookshop.co.uk

Or if you prefer you can buy it off Amazon

http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bad-Science-Ben-Goldacre/dp/0007240198/?tag=bs0b-21

del.icio.us Digg it reddit Google StumbleUpon Slashdot It!

72 Responses

1.

orzr said,

August 30, 2008 at 8:25 am

There is another issue here that contributed to the situation. That
was the government’s fundamental dishonesty about how vaccines work
and why they are needed.

It seems to me that vaccines achieve their effect through “herd
immunity”. i.e. When a high enough percentage of the population is not
susceptible to an infection, it doesn’t take hold.

However, the government has not used this as an argument in favour of
vaccination. Instead, it has adopted a fear-mongering tone of “you are
putting your child at risk if you don’t have him/her vaccinated!”.
They may consider that the end justifies the means but, in this case,
it hasn’t worked.

Let’s get this clear. If the vaccination programme works as intended,
no child is protected from M, M or R by their individual vaccination.
They are protected because everyone’s vaccination means there is no M,
M or R in the community.

This attitude contributes to the public’s mistrust of anyone in
authority giving them health advice and it doesn’t suprise me that
people are sceptical. Also, for most of today’s parents, childhood
diseases were a fact of life and not very serious. The government
needs to do more than adopt a hectoring tone that measles is a killer
when that was not most people’s experience.

Finally, the government never came up with a convincing argument
against those parents who just wanted separate vaccines for M, M and
R. There was just more bullying and accusations of putting children at
risk.

It would have been far better to have adopted a community-spirited
approach and ask everyone to take part in the programme for the sake
of everyone else, recognising the benefits for all of us if children
don’t have to go through measles etc. (e.g. none of the discomfort, no
school time lost, etc.). They could have been honest about the
relatively small number of lives that would be saved but acknowledge
that this wouldn’t be a factor for most people.

1.

Anthony said,

August 30, 2008 at 9:01 am

For this paper by D’Souza et al, like the Afzal paper before it, the
media were united in their silence. It was covered, by my count, in
only three places: my column; a Reuters news agency report; and a post
on the lead researcher’s boyfriend’s blog (where he talked about how
proud he was of his girlfriend). Nowhere else.

It was picked up by other blogs.

I picked up the Afzal and the D’Souza paper (both the conference
abstract and the full paper) at the time of publication.

http://www.blacktriangle.org/blog/?p=1332

http://www.blacktriangle.org/blog/?p=1392

http://www.blacktriangle.org/blog/?p=1470

I think this is largely correct:

It is madness to imagine that one single man can create a 10-year
scare story. It is also dangerous to imply - even in passing - that
academics should be policed not to speak their minds, no matter how
poorly evidenced their claims.

However, there is a difference between speaking one’s mind, making
claims well beyond what the evidence is.

The question is, would this scare story have happened without
Wakefield. It is clear that he was in part responsible for triggering
the story, and continued to help stir it up.

For example, alleging in the Lancet that there was an epidemiological
link between autism and MMR vaccine. Besides the media and Wakefield,
there’s also the single vaccine suppliers (some of whom have good
access to the media), and a failure of scientists in the field to get
out and engage.

I used to think Wakefield had painted himself into a corner, and found
it hard to extricate himself for various reasons. Knowing what we know
now I think it is harder to argue that point.

1.

BobP said,

August 30, 2008 at 9:47 am

Very thorough - well done. I’ll definitely put the book on my Xmas
list.

1.

Toenex said,

August 30, 2008 at 9:53 am

Perhaps in the future whenever a ‘celebrity’ presents a opinion on a
subject that isn’t related to who Ben Afleck is dating or how fabulous
Fern Brittan is/isn’t looking, a little box on the screen or footnote
to the article should be presented which advertises the DVD for Brass
Eye. Just to remind folks that simply because airbrushed photo’s of
this person sell magazines and even if they have an outstanding
singing voice doesn’t mean they know more than your mother about the
subject in question. In our modern celebrity obsessed culture I
seriously think that Brass Eye should become mandatory viewing for
school kids aged 15.

1.

superburger said,

August 30, 2008 at 10:50 am

i thought wakefield’s hearing at the gmc was about the ethics of his
research (not the actual hypothesis that he was testing).

e.g. giving fivers to kids for blood samples at birthday parties.

1.

kevleitch said,

August 30, 2008 at 11:04 am

Ben, the Afzal paper was published in March, not May. I blogged it 5
days later.

The D’Souza paper was published on 4 October 2006. I first blogged
about it the day before on the 3rd.

Whilst I agree that Wakefield cannot be held solely to account for the
MMR debacle, his is the largest part played. It was he who pressed on
despite at least two people telling him the data was wrong, it was he
accepted hundreds of thousands of pounds to ‘produce’ science for
litigation. Are the press stupid and culpable? Of course they are. But
without Wakefield they would never have had the chance.

1.

woodchopper said,

August 30, 2008 at 11:06 am

I couldn’t find this article on the Guardian’s web site. I hope that’s
because copyright issues prevented them from publishing online parts
of the book, and not that the article has been pulled for some reason.

Or maybe my search skills are just crap …

1.

misterjohn said,

August 30, 2008 at 11:26 am

And what do GoogleAds give us on the Guardian website after Ben’s
article?
Three guesses not needed….

single mmr vaccines
Consultant led Clinics Nationwide Tel: 0845 130 4595

www.directremedies.com

Single MMR in Manchester
Doctor-led clinic fully registered with the Healthcare Commission

www.singlejabs.co.uk

Individual MMR vaccines
single measles, rubella & mumps at registered Hertfordshire clinic

www.breakspearmedical.com

Nil carborundum

1.

tomtubbs said,

August 30, 2008 at 11:31 am

Great section from the upcoming book, and an eye opening angle - in
retrospect, things become clearer, in large part from analysis like
Ben’s

1.

lilylangtree said,

August 30, 2008 at 12:03 pm

Great article.

However I’m not convinced that the same MMR/autism scare is
‘practically nonexistent outside the UK’. I use two messageboards
which are predominatly made up of American women; in both cases the
vaccination issue is EXTREMELY contentious and the autism issue right
there in the forefront.

1.

amargi said,

August 30, 2008 at 12:12 pm

Excellent, as usual.

But you should have a word with the Guardian / Google / whomever puts
ads up in the bits under the article in the Guardian online - 3
adverts for single MMR vaccination clinics is rather amusing.

1.

Ben Goldacre said,

August 30, 2008 at 12:20 pm

oops got date of afzal wrong, corrected, and i didnt mean to imply in
my mangled sentence that these papers werent covered by bloggers: they
most excellently were, and oddly i’ve just been talking about how
excellently the anti-anti-vaxxer blogs have covered these issues at
the nature science bloggers conference in the RI, where i am sitting
right now.

http://network.nature.com/group/sciblog2008

i should also be absolutely clear, in case it’s not obvious: i’m
certainly not impressed by what wakefield has done, but i am much more
astonished by the way the media are clearly revving up to blame him
for their own mmr debacle.

1.

woodchopper said,

August 30, 2008 at 12:25 pm

Scratch the above comment - its now on the site.

Great article as well.

1.

tialaramex said,

August 30, 2008 at 12:41 pm

orzr, you are confusing two things, and maybe that does suggest that
we’re not communicating well enough to the public (but I don’t see the
media trying to help)

Immunisation does work on individuals. But it isn’t 100% effective.
Giving your child a vaccination means only that they’re less likely to
get the associated disease, and in some cases that they’re likely to
be less sick if they do contract it. We cannot be certain that a child
given MMR won’t later die of Measles, we can only say that it’s hugely
less likely. Thus just immunising your child isn’t enough to be “safe”
we have to do more.

But there is an individual reason to choose vaccination, it does make
individual children safer to be vaccinated, and our research shows
that the price (in terms of the unforeseeable adverse outcomes for a
small minority of children who are vaccinated, which in very rare
cases could include death) is worth risking for this benefit.

However the primary Public Health reason for MMR in early childhood is
indeed the herd immunity. This is the same individual immunity seen
from a population level. Herd immunity means that if you have Measles
(for example) most people you meet won’t catch Measles. Without herd
immunity, disease races through the population, one sick person
quickly becomes hundreds, thousands, even millions. This really used
to happen, right here in Britain, and before vaccination no-one could
do a thing about it besides wring their hands.

You might think of the individual and herd immunity factors as being
like the difference between stopping smoking, and banning smoking in
restaurants. If you stop smoking, you almost immediately begin to see
health benefits. But if we ban everyone from smoking in the restaurant
then the whole population benefits. But just because we ban smoking in
restaurants doesn’t mean you’re fine to keep smoking at home - it’s
still bad for you there.

People who don’t immunise their kids out of irrational fear caused by
media hysteria are simultaneously putting the kids at risk as
individuals (a small but non-zero increased chance they’ll die of or
be permanently disabled by an easily preventable childhood ailment)
and being selfish by reducing the local herd immunity, putting kids
who can’t be vaccinated (e.g. those too sick from cancer treatment) at
risk.

We need to create a situation where the modern journalist “bullshit”
approach to health and science news is openly scorned. I want to see a
journalist fired for doing this, and not in a “next week you’ll have a
job that pays even better in another newspaper” way, I mean send them
back to write articles about the 10km fun run in a Dorset town’s local
paper. If journalists want to be a “profession” they need to start
acting professionally.

1.

Delster said,

August 30, 2008 at 1:44 pm

Two words for all the anti-vac journo’s & hangers on…. “Small Pox”

1.

MataHari said,

August 30, 2008 at 2:42 pm

Twenty years ago, in 1988, I research a programme on NHS history for
the BBC.

One of the topics I was given was the then vaccine-brain-damage story.
It was a big story in its day – when you were knee-high to a kitten –
and the govt voted to give compensation to parents of vaccine-damaged
children. I think (recall hazy) that the vaccination was for measles.

I traced the scare to a paper – the lead paper in that issue – of
Archives of Diseases of Childhood. The two authors were 1. A person
with a middle-east name who was absent from the Medical Directory and
Science Citation Index and elxewhere, in other words he had vanished
(this was pre-Internet) and 2. the then prof of something at Gt Ormond
St.

The study showed that children were diagnosed as retarded/subnormal a
few weeks after vaccination.

And that was all it showed. Full stop. No attempt at cause-and-effect.
No story.

Martin Bax, who edits Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, said
he would not have published it.

And the story had originally broken after a conference paper that was
reported in the Standard and the Telegraph. But at that stage it
hadn’t been peer-reviewed.

It has been taken up by a bacteriologist whose name I have long
forgotten. Patrick Collard, emeritus prof of bacteriology, Manchester,
said the bacteriologist was sane in most ways but had an
anti-mass-vaccination bee in his bonnet.

1.

used to be jdc said,

August 30, 2008 at 3:03 pm

Having published anti-MMR articles by the likes of Peter Hitchens,
Richard Halvorsen and Julia Carling, the Mail (in March of this year)
wrote of Wakefield: “The doctor who sparked a worldwide health scare
over the MMR jab charged £150 an hour to a law firm that planned to
sue the vaccine’s manufacturer, an enquiry heard today.”

The Independent, meanwhile, wrote (in June) that “confidence in the
vaccine was dashed by publication of a paper in The Lancet in 1998 by
Andrew Wakefield and colleagues from the Royal Free Hospital, linking
the jab with autism.”

I wrote this: “Measles is endemic, Wakefield is up before the GMC and
the media are walking away nonchalantly, pretending they were never
involved.”

I also nicked Ben’s line about this being the “Media’s MMR Hoax” for a
piece I wrote titled Wakefield - Scapegoated by the media

1.

dropsy said,

August 30, 2008 at 3:10 pm

Great article as always. I have a personal interest in this as our
family was living in Islington 5 years ago when our then 10 month son
was due to have his MMR but developed measles before his jab was due
and became very ill. Clearly this would not have happened if most
trendy North London families had given their kids the vaccine.

1.

dropsy said,

August 30, 2008 at 3:25 pm

Also

What is this about doing colonoscopies in autistic children

Presumably an ethics committee/ Institutional review board approved
this??

1.

Jeremy Miles said,

August 30, 2008 at 4:59 pm

I moved to America a couple of years ago (with my already MMR
vaccinated kids), and though people have the same worries, they are
slightly different.

The big difference is that if you don’t have MMR vaccination, and
proof of that, you don’t go to school. (And a TB test, and a couple of
other things) [Disclaimer - that might only be true of Los Angeles or
California, I’ve never checked anywhere else]. So there is no debate
or argument unless you home school your offspring, or unless you have
pretty convincing religious objections (no idea what that might be).

So very few children are not vaccinated - the recent outbreaks in the
US have been amongst home-schooled kids (of whom there are quite a
lot).

1.

jackdripper said,

August 30, 2008 at 5:12 pm

We have just had our 13 month old son vaccinated with the MMR. Thanks
to Ben’s persistence with the story I had the facts at hand to allay
my wife’s concerns. Even so, lately every time I saw a (usually scary)
MMR story in the press or online I would still scoff at the stupidity
but also worry a tiny bit, reading the stories in 2005 as a non-parent
was viscerally different to reading them over the last year and having
a real baby boy to consider (I realise how selfish this sounds, but
that’s parenthood!)
The insidious nature of the sometimes well-argued but just-plain-wrong
opinion/quasi-reportage pieces on this issue had me doubting the
mountain of evidence and plain common sense.
So what is the effect of the one sided coverage on parents who come to
the issue neutral? The fall in vaccination rates is horrifyingly
eloquent.

1.

Rocko said,

August 30, 2008 at 7:11 pm

Fantastic article, Ben.

1.

crgn said,

August 30, 2008 at 7:24 pm

Pennslvania also makes MMR a condition of being allowed into schools,
as I found when we moved there many moons ago and I had to start at
Junior High. Even though both my brother and I had had mumps as
toddlers, they insisted we must have all three.
As a meeja type myself, I frequently despair at the poor scientific
knowledge of writers, but it’s really just a symptom of an endemic
problem with newspapers. As ever-larger conglomerates take over
once-frespected papers, costs get squeezed and you end up with unpaid
people taken on for work experience evntually given a job as chief
writer for one section or other. It’s not their fault they don’t know
this stuff, everyone is just copying and pasting from Wikipedia,
anyway, as paying expenses for travel (or in fact anything at all) to
talk to someone who knows what they are on abou is forbidden. So the
moment some name that can be quoted spouts some toss (I’m looking at
you, Holford) it goes straight in. Luckily there are a few
conscientious subs around who are ready to tweak the snake-oil claims
and stick qualifiers round them, but they have no authority to say
“this is bullshit, you know” and get it thrown out.
Sorry, off-topic a touch there. Looking forward to the book. You,
Brooker and the Mighty M in the comic section are the main reason I
still buy teh Gaurdian. Kep it up.

1.

kim said,

August 30, 2008 at 7:52 pm

Delster - interesting point, but of course it took a long time to get
the smallpox vaccine right, and a number of people were killed by the
vaccine before they perfected it.

1.

JQH said,

August 30, 2008 at 8:57 pm

The vaccination rate round here is reportedly somewhere around 60%.
TeenH’s school sent a letter round last year about a number of measles
cases at the school. It would appear that not only are some of the
chattering classes convinced they know more about medicine than their
doctors, they are also too stupid to recognise the onset of a serious
illness.

Personally I hold Wakefield and the media equally to blame for the
current situation. I agree with Ben that researchers have the right to
think unorthodox thoughts *BUT* there must have come a time when
Wakefield had realised his conclusions did not stand up. If he’d said
“Sorry guys, called that wrong” no blame could be attached to him. But
he did not.

The media carry the lion’s share of the blame for ignoring evidence
that proved Wakefield wrong and persisting with their narrative of
“Lone crusader v. Evil Government and Big Pharma” long past the poit
where it was remotely credible. It wasn’t just the Daily Hate either.
Anybody else remember the Observer’s incredible vanishing MMR story?

Fuck, this is loser length. I’ll shut up now.

1.

McDoz said,

August 30, 2008 at 10:19 pm

Nice article Ben, I think you’re right to defend every investigator’s
right to be wrong, so to speak. It’s only through getting things wrong
9 times out of ten that science advances at all.

To MataHari, I think you must be referrring to the whooping cough
vaccine / permanent neurological damage scare in throughout the 70s,
that was finally resolved in court in 1988. There is an good academic
article on this from 2003 by a geezer called Jefffrey Baker
(Vaccine. 2003 Sep 8; 21(25-26): 4003-10.). To give a brief resume of
the article:

1974 publication of a case-series from Gt Ormond St Hospital
suggesting link between whooping cough vaccine and brain damage in
infants.

1977 Whooping cough vaccine uptake had fallen from 77% to 33%
nationally.

1978, 1982 and 1985 major whooping cough epidemics in the UK.

1977-1981 Big case control study on “every child between 2 and 36
months of life hospitalized in England, Scotland, and Wales for acute
neurological illness” concludes that there is a statistically
significant increased risk of neurological illness due to vaccination,
but the risk is very low.

1982 onwards, coordinated government publicity to convince people that
whooping cough vaccination is safe. To quote from the article again,
“The Health Minister’s daughter and Prince William himself were both
inoculated amidst great publicity” Rather different from what happened
with baby Leo, by the looks of things.

1990 to present day, vaccination rates high again, no major increase
in neurological illness in vaccine-age children.

None of the papers seem to have learnt anything from this whole story.

1.

Geeb said,

August 30, 2008 at 11:35 pm

@orzr:

Interesting point about the lack of a convincing argument against
single vaccinations. I’ve heard two rumours, but nothing official:

1) Individual risk: the massive use of MMR around the world means that
we can be pretty confident about the (lack of) side-effects, whereas
the single vaccines haven’t been tested to anything like the same
extent, and therefore might just maybe possibly be more harmful.

2) Herd immunity risk: overall immunisation rates would probably end
up being lower, as people would often do one or two of the three and
then forget about the rest, or fail to get round to it, or decide it’s
too expensive, or whatever.

Would be good to get a view from someone with some actual medical
knowledge…

1.

Robert Carnegie said,

August 31, 2008 at 1:52 am

I think Tony Blair should have been vaccinated publicly. Leo I accept
it’s none of our business.

Of course there are GPs against combined vaccines. They get paid more
for giving more injections, and more yet again for attending the sick
and damaged and dying who were not vaccinated. GPs as a body stood
against the NHS from the beginning and everything it has achieved.

It seems to me that an intelligent, thoughtful and moral person who
was in the position that Dr Andrew Wakefield was in after he started
this thing up would have said publicly and loudly “Hang on, the
research that I’ve done doesn’t mean very much.” Instead he went to
America to sell anti-autism suppositories. (Well, remedies that if you
aren’t intended to stick them up your arse, you might as well.)

As for herd immunity… have I got this straight? A vaccine confers
resistance to a communicable disease, but not everyone will get the
vaccine or have it work successfully. Due to “herd immunity” the
disease is still eliminated from the population, because it can no
longer pass between people when the infectee is protected by the
vaccine, so, whether victims recover or die, it runs out of them. On
the other hand, a vaccine carries some risk, if only of an unlikely
serious needle injury, a different infection in the tiny wound, or the
car journey to the doctor. So the wise parent will get everyone else’s
children vaccinated, but perhaps not their own. One imagines a kind of
adapted air rifle and a sniping position overlooking the school
playground.

There is surely a mathematical cutoff point during a vaccination
campaign where the benefit of an individual’s vaccination to them is
lower than its risk, as the risk of someone else infecting you
reduces. No doubt though the measles vaccine takeup is well below that
point. Again.

1.

dw said,

August 31, 2008 at 4:19 am

Jeremy,

Actually in California, children are not forced to have the MMR
vaccination to attend public school. State laws in California and
about half the other states of the USA allows parents to register a
“philosophical” objection to the vaccination: however school officials
usually aren’t too anxious to make parents aware of this situation.
Most of the remaining states allow for religious objections. See
http://vaccinesafety.edu/cc-exem.htm

Like you, moved to California from the UK some years ago and I have a
new baby. We are planning to immunize our child against measles: I’m
not convinced that the benefits of the mumps and rubella vaccines
justify the vaccinations. Not because of any concerns about autism,
but simply because the diseases, if contracted during childhood, don’t
seem serious enough (for what it’s worth, I had all three diseases as
a child and I’m only in my early 30s). We’d prefer to let her immune
system focus on vaccinations that seem really worthwhile such as
pertussis. If our daughter doesn’t acquire immunity against mumps and
rubella by the time she’s 10 we’ll vaccinate her against mumps and
rubella then.

I think the NHS’s refusal to provide separate vaccinations is
unfortunate. While the combined vaccination may be more convenient and
offer better protection, the NHS should come to terms with the fact
that a large proportion of the British population has, because of the
hysterical media coverage, come to believe that the combined MMR is
unsafe. Given that this is the case, surely it is better to get people
vaccinated separately, even if a few months late and perhaps with a
few no-shows, than not to get them vaccinated at all?

1.

BobP said,

August 31, 2008 at 11:30 am

dw -
a) every time you breathe, every time you scratch yourself you take in
a load of bugs and your immune system dutifully zaps them. the extra
load induced by vaccination is negligible.
b) there is an argument that the immune system - liky many other of yr
bodies systems - benefits & develops from being “exercised”. I’m not
sure if this is backed by evidence though.
c) there’s a good chance that your daughter will reach adulthood
without catching and becoming immune to mumps & rubella. Both are
potentially severe diseases in adults - mumps can be debilitating,
rubella can severly damage the unborn child of a pregnant woman.
Check it out here:

http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/default.htm

http://kidshealth.org/parent/infections/

1.

Jeesh42 said,

August 31, 2008 at 11:48 am

Kudos on the book. Will be buying my copy this week.

1.

Junkmonkey said,

August 31, 2008 at 11:51 am

Isn’t Smallpox one word?

1.

Ephiny said,

August 31, 2008 at 12:21 pm

“We’d prefer to let her immune system focus on vaccinations that seem
really worthwhile such as pertussis.”

I’m not an expert on this, but I’m pretty sure that’s not how it
works.

1.

Dr* T said,

August 31, 2008 at 4:09 pm

BobP,

Not sure if for (b) you mean something like this

Disclaimer - I’ve not investigated further as to how good the research
is.

1.

bobtheknob said,

August 31, 2008 at 7:01 pm

good of you to promote the vaccine agenda
i hope the brothers at the lodge reward you well

1.

RS said,

August 31, 2008 at 10:25 pm

I don’t know when the changeover happened but the current pertussis
(whooping cough) vaccine is the acellular rather than the whole cell
variety, which has a much lower rate of side effects. I believe there
is genuine evidence for a (very rare) risk of neurological sequalae
after whole cell pertussis.

1.

IHR said,

September 1, 2008 at 1:02 am

A couple of additional points about the early days of the MMR scare:
As I understood it, the complications of whooping cough were almost
entirely the result of bacterial infections — the effects in a healthy
child could be mitigated by getting prompt medical care. So
conscientious parents might decide to forego the vaccination.

When the question of a connection between the MMR vaccination and
autism arose, the best that the establishment could answer was “Well,
we don’t think so, but of course our reporting system would not show
one anyway.” People looking back and sneering are forgetting that the
statistics did not exist, either in the UK or elsewhere “Other
countries have been giving this jab for longer, and of course their
autism rates are rising but only a little and we don’t think MMR is
what is causing it”. The fact that the UK system for reporting ill
effects of vaccines only collected immediate events damaged UK public
trust more generally.

I don’t know the exact history of what Wakefield claimed when. Did he
himself ever claim it was a major cause of autism?

1.

mdimmick said,

September 1, 2008 at 9:43 am

crgn’s experience chimes heavily with what Nick Davies wrote in his
book ‘Flat Earth News’ (website at http://www.flatearthnews.net/). The
media may not be deliberately ignorant, but they’re not helping
themselves by insisting on ‘balance’ where you have an expert trying
to counter in a sentence a whole article from the fruitcake’s point of
view.

1.

mdimmick said,

September 1, 2008 at 9:50 am

As for why not individual vaccines, the NHS ‘MMR The Facts’ website
says this:

“Single vaccines in place of MMR put children and their families at
increased and unnecessary risk. The combined vaccine is safer as it
reduces the risk of children catching the diseases while they are
waiting for full immunisation cover.”

from http://www.mmrthefacts.nhs.uk/basics/truths.php

1.

muscleman said,

September 1, 2008 at 10:41 am

I have had M, M and R, the latter as an adult during my PhD, my young
daughters got it at the same time. They had been immunised for measles
and mumps but the rubella came later at school.

My wife’s younger sister when young had to be rushed to hospital
because of measles complications while on holiday. It is no laughing
matter, I vividly remember having measles aged about 7 and I would not
wish that on any child.

It is true, those who forget their history are doomed to repeat it.
The problem is they condemn the rest of us to experience it too.

1.

fontwell said,

September 1, 2008 at 11:08 am

In my opinion its not the scientific understanding of journalists that
is the problem, it is the combination of two other things 1)
Journalists can rely on a low public understanding the science
involved 2) They would rather right up a ‘good story’ than a true one.

The idea that the MMR vaccine causes autism is obviously a ‘good
story’ - look how long it’s run. The only reason it managed to go so
long was that they could, to borrow a phrase, rely on herd ignorance.

To think that the offending journalists don’t get the science but
would report it correctly if they did, is basically naive.

I remember an article by Ben a while ago
www.badscience.net/2005/10/lab-that-finds-bugs-where-others-do-not/
wherein a journo mate of Ben’s wanted to do a ‘Dirty Hospitals MRSA’
piece but was confounded when all his samples came back negative. That
stopped him until another journo tipped him the name of the lab to
send samples to, if he wanted somewhere that “gives positive results
when others do not.”

The fact that this was known to be the case by journalists and yet
still they wrote the stories says it all. Cliche alert; The only
purpose a newspapers is to sell newspapers.

1.

K9 said,

September 1, 2008 at 12:47 pm

Now then, DW

As an immunologist, I can tell you that epiphiny is on the right
lines. The immune system recognises all foreign (non-self) molecules
by having recognition and effector cells (lymphocytes) which, quite
spookily, can recognise all possible non-self molecular possibilities.
They do this individually and there are enough of these cells in the
body to recognise every foreign determinant there is, has been or ever
will be (honest). Because each lymphocyte recognises a different
foreign molecule (aka antigen) the body can identify and respond to as
many antigen challenges as it gets. Epiphiny’s comment about breathing
in millions of bugs each hour is completely correct and there is no
such thing as immunological overload.

Whats more, I can give you one more reason to have multiple vaccines;
they actually can help the body to respond to each other, by something
called the adjuvant effect. This actually improves vaccine efficacy.

In my line of work (veterinary) we routinely vaccinate dogs and cats
on an annual basis and although there are a few conspiracy theory
naysayers in the ether, there are rarely any side effects of note.
These vaccines are often 5 component shots too.

1.

FlammableFlower said,

September 1, 2008 at 4:54 pm

@bobtheknob(#35):

Go conspiracy!

1.

thekumquat said,

September 1, 2008 at 7:01 pm

K9 - I only scraped through my first-year immunology course, but I’m
now on a number of forums for pregnant women/parents and getting into
debate on MMR and other things. I usually refer people here rather
than bashing my head in or risking being wrong…

Can you explain why, given the adjuvant effect and the obvious risk of
contracting a disease before the vac is given, we don’t do all the
childhood jabs in one go the day the baby is born? Why wait to do MMR
rather than mix it with the 5-in-1 shot? Presumably there is some
reason that isn’t just ‘cost’?

1.

RS said,

September 1, 2008 at 9:15 pm

thekumquat,

for a start maternal IgG crosses the placenta so would likely
inactivate the vaccine preventing the development of an immune
response.

1.

muscleman said,

September 2, 2008 at 9:14 am

For another thing it takes time for the foetal dependance on maternal
immunity to wind down as their own immune systems wind up. Give an
antigen too soon and there will be no functioning immune system to
respond to it.

To those who think 5 antigens in a vaccine is ‘overload’ just tell
them how many epitopes there are on your average viral protein coat.
Then tell them about bacteria… The overload hypothesis relies on a
combination of ignorance and a lack of thought. A moments push to get
people to regard reality can cure it.

1.

K9 said,

September 2, 2008 at 10:58 am

Thanks to RS and muscleman for valid points about why we cannot
vaccinate newborn babies.

Also, in young babies/animals there are considerable amounts of
hormones floating about which can reduce vaccine priming/efficacy.
What is more, polysaccharide vaccines don’t appear to elicit
antibodies in newborn babies.

The ages at which we give many vaccines relates to the age at which
the specific diseases are prevalent. For example, in the developed
world we give measles vaccine at school age whereas in the developing
world it is given as early as possible because there it is a major
cause of death in infants.

On a related and current matter, I do hope the cervical cancer vaccine
is taken up fully and I wish the UK schools had come up with a
strategy to implement vaccination coverage in a quicker timescale than
they are using. For example, my 12 year old daughter will be jabbed
next school term, but my 15 year old daughter won’t get it until she
is 18. As we know how the papillomavirus is spread (nooky), that seems
to be the wrong way round. Also, shouldn’t they vaccinate the boys
too; they are the virus carriers after all.

1.

thekumquat said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:14 pm

Thanks for the info on newborn babies and vaccines. I still don’t get
though why the NHS vaccine schedule spaces out the jabs so much -
obviously some are boosters, but why do 5in1 and PCV at two months,
but wait a month before doing the first MenC and a year before the
first MMR?

Why can’t the 12-month Hib/MenC booster be done at the same time as
MMR and the PCV booster, timetabled a month later?
For that matter, why can’t the vaccinations be put in the same syringe
so only one injection is needed each time?

I know of parents who see the pain caused to their baby by an
injection, weigh that up against what they see as a low risk of a
minor disease, and fail to get further jabs done (of course there’s
the other parents who worry about vaccine ‘overload’ and want single
M+M+R jabs, so the NHS can’t win…)

NHS vaccination timetable found at
http://www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk/articles/
article.aspx?articleId=1039

1.

kim said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:22 pm

Geeb - when you think about it, it makes much more sense to give the
MMR vaccine as a three-in-one jab rather than separately because it
means two jabs rather than six.

Six jabs means:

1. Lots of parents are going to get fed up and not bother to take
their children six times.

2. As someone else said, while waiting in between jabs, the child
could catch the disease it hasn’t been vaccinated against.

3. It greatly increases the amount of time the practice nurse spends
giving vaccinations, which means a greater financial burden on the
NHS.

4. Three separate vaccines are, I would guess, more expensive to
produce and to purchase than one single vaccine.

5. If as a parent you don’t like the “crap” that goes into a vaccine
(excuse the technical terminology), your child is going to get three
times the amount of crap it would otherwise.

1.

Robert Brown said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:26 pm

Does anybody have any thoughts on questions as to Vaccines Mercury and
Autism?

(see abstract below)

What added products are used in vaccines in the UK? Do they include
mercury based products?

To what extent does mercury accumulate in the brain?

To what extent do mecury compounds give rise to functional issues in
glial cells?

(see book link below)

Could additional oxidative stress due to vaccination in some
circumstances tip the balance?

http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=f28oPWrcJfkC&pg=PA14&lpg=PA14&dq=glia+and+mecury&source=web&ots=cv
4KDYZrzK&sig=75ZiNaJhxiA5kLsvYDUQ-67IR4A&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=2&ct=result

http://www.lewrockwell.com/regenstein/regenstein12.html

” Even CDC Director Dr. Julie Gerberding, who has led the campaign to
defend vaccines, reassure the public, and belittle parents’ concerns,
recently admitted during a CNN interview that vaccines can trigger
autism in a certain vulnerable subset of children.

Vaccines have done much good in preventing many dread diseases, and
most children suffer no apparent ill effects from them. But we cannot
ignore the possibility that vaccines, particularly the mercury
component, may be a factor in the current epidemic among children of
neurological disorders, perhaps exacerbated by a genetic or other
underlying disposition in some youngsters.

So what is to be done? To begin, federal health officials should
conduct the long-called-for comprehensive studies comparing vaccinated
children with unvaccinated ones, such as in the Amish community, where
the incidence of autism is said to be almost non-existent.

At the very least, why not remove mercury and other toxic substances
like aluminum, anti-freeze, and formaldehyde as preservatives from
vaccinations; space out the schedule of shots, instead of giving so
many at once; and delay giving some of the riskiest of them until
infants are somewhat older? “

1.

K9 said,

September 2, 2008 at 1:55 pm

Robert Brown

Have you considered sunspots as causes of autism? Probably not. Why is
this so? There is as much evidence for this connection as there is for
any of the other drivel that is associated with vaccination as a
potential initiating cause.

Let me explain how science works. One has an idea and then designs
experiments that try to disprove that idea. If the resulting data
cannot disprove this idea then it may be correct. Basically,
scientists generate as much relevant data about the idea and then
analyse it and make a conclusion. This is then written up and
submitted to a scientific journal where international experts will
look at the idea, methods, data and conclusions and decide whether or
not they justify publication. If so approved, the scientific community
then will get to read the work and draw their own conclusions and
disseminate them to the public.

The internet has, unfortunately, created an alternative scientific
“community” (I use the term loosely) in which rumour spreaders/false
prophets of doom/snake oil merchants/conspiracy junkies decide that
something causes something else and then thrash around the internet
desperately trying to find evidence, usually anecdotal (ie worthless
on its own) to support their claim. Firstly, this is completely
invalid as a means of identifying cause and effect (in any situation).
Secondly, wouldn’t these efforts be much more usefully channeled into
something useful?

Finally, why do these comments largely seem to come from a large land
mass many miles west of the UK?

1.

RS said,

September 2, 2008 at 2:52 pm

“Why can’t the 12-month Hib/MenC booster be done at the same time as
MMR and the PCV booster, timetabled a month later?
For that matter, why can’t the vaccinations be put in the same syringe
so only one injection is needed each time?”

While some vaccines have been tested and shown to be safe to
administer at the same time (i.e. MMR) other vaccines must be
administered many weeks apart (the minimum necessary period is
unknown) to avoid interactions that might reduce the efficacy of the
vaccines.

1.

RS said,

September 2, 2008 at 2:59 pm

“But we cannot ignore the possibility that vaccines, particularly the
mercury component, may be a factor in the current epidemic among
children of neurological disorders”

We can ignore it actually. There is no evidence for any current
‘epidemic’ of neurological disorders, nor is there any evidence that
thiomersal can cause neurological disordes, nor is there any evidence
for an association between currently used vaccines and neurological
disorders. And there is evidence against all these propositions.

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 2, 2008 at 3:23 pm

Private EYE produced a special edition about the MMR, lacking in any
satirical content, full of everyone who had something to say against
MMR. Did Dr. Phil Hammond protest? I guess he’s in the same position
as Ben when the Observer makes a blatant gaff, though Private Eye to
my knowledge is the only national publication to produce an entire
special issue for the anti-MMR lobby.

BTW the majority of parents around here (Shoreditch) who don’t get
there kids vaccinated are too ill/ depressed/ drunk/ ignorant/
illiterate/ anxious/ overwhelmed/busy/ beat-up to do so. The
MMR/autism debate hasn’t registered on their radar.

1.

Ben Goldacre said,

September 2, 2008 at 3:36 pm

“I guess he’s in the same position as Ben when the Observer makes a
blatant gaff”

au contraire, they were quite grown up about it.

http://www.badscience.net/2007/07/the-mmr-story-that-wasnt/

1.

Getonyerbike said,

September 2, 2008 at 3:41 pm

not the EYE though?

1.

Ben Goldacre said,

September 2, 2008 at 3:48 pm

i met ian hislop once - obviously i was just slightly starstruck - and
he had some kind of story about how private eye aren’t really
anti-mmr. i can’t remember what it was so it might have been a bit
tortuous.

1.

Robert Brown said,

September 2, 2008 at 4:21 pm

K9 and RS Thanks for the response.

Did you look at the book I posted a link to which was raising issues
as to the use of thimerosal.

From your comment about WEB science I assume you did not.

This is the book

The Role of Glia in Neurotoxicity
By Michael Aschner, Lucio G. Costa

which raises the issue I highlighted in a considered way. It is
authored by a neuroscientist.

Professor of Pediatrics; Professor of Pharmacology; Gray E. B.
Stahlman Professor of Neuroscience

1.

Robert Brown said,

September 2, 2008 at 5:31 pm

For clarity it is Michael Aschner who is the Professor of Pediatrics;
Professor of Pharmacology; Gray E. B. Stahlman Professor of
Neuroscience

His interest list as

Transport mechanisms from the periphery into the brain, developmental
neurotoxicology, role of metals in neurodegeneration, Gulf War
syndrome

1.

RS said,

September 2, 2008 at 5:44 pm

Robert, so what? That link contains no evidence at all for the claim
you are making it just “raise[s] questions”.

I’m a neuroscientist too, I can ‘raise questions’ too and it amounts
to fuck all just the same.

1.

gadgeezer said,

September 2, 2008 at 9:02 pm

@Robert Brown

What added products are used in vaccines in the UK? Do they include
mercury based products?

Strictly speaking, everything in a vaccine is an added product,
including water. However, thiomersal (contains ethylmercury) was
removed from UK vaccines some time ago.

At the very least, why not remove mercury and other toxic substances
like aluminum, anti-freeze, and formaldehyde as preservatives from
vaccinations

Aluminium salts are used as adjuvants, they are not preservatives:
without them, the vaccines would not be as effective. Aluminium
exposure is ubiquitous. Discussion and lots of links to information
about aluminium or aluminium salts in vaccines.

There is not now, nor has there ever been, any anti-freeze in vaccines
- that’s a misunderstanding.

As for formaldehyde, it is an intrinsic metabolic by-product that is
already in our bodies. The amount in a vaccine relative to the amount
that is already present in a new-born seems to be neither here nor
there.

Assuming an average weight of a 2-month-old of 5 kg and an average
blood volume of 85 ml per kg, the total quantity of formaldehyde found
in an infant’s circulation would be about 1.1 mg — a value at least
five-fold greater than that to which an infant would be exposed in
vaccines. Second, quantities of formaldehyde at least 600 — fold
greater than that contained in vaccines have been given safely to
animals.

1.

Robert Brown said,

September 2, 2008 at 11:17 pm

RS Thanks for the response

I agree the book just raises questions.

I MADE NO CLAIM in my post. I have no grounds to do so.

I was simply seeking to raise the questions that were being asked in
the book and see if any body could throw more light on the subject in
the way of information on thimerosal, current UK policy and usage,
views on outstanding questions if any etc.

I heard a practicing American Neurosurgeon publicly and unequivocally
stating in no uncertain terms there were a number of answered
questions as to the impact of additives in vaccines on glial function
and oxidation and was curious.

I regrettably do not have time to go and read some of the papers be
better informed.

It seems that some at least believe(d)we do not know all the answers
yet.http://www.ehponline.org/members/2002/suppl-1/11-23clarkson/EHP110s1p11PDF.pdf

Is that significant in the current debate? I am not in a position to
form an opinion.

Many thanks

1.

Robert Brown said,

September 3, 2008 at 12:48 pm

Many thanks Gadgeezer for your informative response.

Based on your response IF thimerosal was ever an issue in the UK it
has been sidelined by removal.

This looks like an informative site on the thimerosal.

http://www.vaccineinformation.org/thimerosal.asp

This is a forum expressing concerns about adjuvants and particularly
aluminium. It claims insufficient research. The site also asks if over
vaccination of children is an issue. I again have insufficient
knowledge to form any view, but would appreciate any informed comment.

http://www.nvic.org/doctors_corner/lawrence_palevsky_aluminum_and_vaccine_ingredients.htm

1.

muscleman said,

September 3, 2008 at 1:14 pm

K9 they are looking at vaccinating the boys against HPV, the problem
is that under current ethical rules you cannot vaccinate them to
protect the girls (though I don’t see why they can’t offer it on a
voluntary basis). Apparently there is a possible link between HPV
infection and testicular cancer, if they can firm that up then the
boys will get jabbed too.

Robert Brown anyone can write a book and get it published. However to
get a research paper published it has to be peer reviewed. So the
conclusions you draw have to supported by your results, you have to
asked the right questions and used the proper techniques. Even then
results in papers are provisional and they are like swallows, one does
not theory make.

So if you have an idea and can’t prove it or even get any sort of
decent evidence then, you write a book. So in any such book look to
see if there are lots of references to the primary literature (journal
of such and such) and not just authored by the book author. Look up
the author on PubMed http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/

and see if they have published primary research papers in the area
(ignore those in Review journals). Often eminent people will opine on
things outside of their purview (Penrose on consciousness is a good
one). Their academic authority when they do is not worth a bean,
unless they also have the evidence. Follow the evidence not the
Authority.

1.

gadgeezer said,

September 3, 2008 at 8:17 pm

This looks like an informative site on the thimerosal.

http://www.vaccineinformation.org/thimerosal.asp

This is a forum expressing concerns about adjuvants and particularly
aluminium. It claims insufficient research…I…would appreciate any
informed comment.

I’m sure that people are happy to comment when there is sufficient
indication that links that they have previously given have been
followed.

In this case, I decline, for that reason. I very much doubt that
anyone who followed the abundance of links to further information
about aluminium would then present vaccineinformation.org or nvic as
sites that should be taken seriously.

1.

Robert Brown said,

September 3, 2008 at 11:45 pm

Gadgeezer - I am sorry that my post was capable of misinterpretation.

I am not sure why vaccineinformation.org should not be taken
seriously. It supports vaccination. These are its partner
organisations listed below(see link below) and a link to the board.

http://www.immunize.org/aboutus/advisoryboard.asp
http://www.immunize.org/aboutus/directors.asp

Professional and public health organizations
American Academy of Pediatrics
American Academy of Physician Assistants
American College of Nurse-Midwives
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
American College of Physicians
American Medical Association
American Nurses Association
American Osteopathic Association
American Pharmacists Association
Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for Infectious Diseases,
CDC
Emory Vaccine Center, Emory University
Infectious Diseases Society of America
Institute for Vaccine Safety, Johns Hopkins University
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Associates and Practitioners
National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
National Medical Association
National Network for Immunization Information
National Vaccine Program Office, HHS
Office of Minority Health, CDC
Pediatric Dengue Vaccine Initiative
Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society
Society for Adolescent Medicine
Vaccine Education Center, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia

The comment starting “This is a forum applies to the site below” was
meant to apply to the site below the comment and not above it.

Eg this link

http://www.nvic.org/doctors_corner/lawrence_palevsky_aluminum_and_vaccine_ingredients.htm

Now having skimmed some of your aluminium link I have a minuscule
understanding of the aluminium issues too. For some reason I had not
followed the link earlier. I apologise for that. Had I done so I doubt
I would have posted the nvic link.

Thank you for your response

1.

kim said,

September 4, 2008 at 12:19 pm

muscleman “the problem is that under current ethical rules you cannot
vaccinate them to protect the girls”

that’s interesting, because as far as i can tell that’s exactly what
they do with the Rubella jab. Technically, I suppose they could argue
they’re protecting the boys against rubella, but of course everyone
knows that rubella is a mild disease, and the real reason for
vaccinating is to stop women contracting it while pregnant.

1.

RS said,

September 4, 2008 at 12:25 pm

As far as I’m aware they decided it would be too expensive to
vaccinate boys too.

1.

treeofpain said,

September 4, 2008 at 5:11 pm

I haven’t bought a Grauniad for ages, what a pleasant surprise! A
whole page spread and a bit more. Excellent stuff. Wakefield obviously
a berk, but woo-peddling journos should not get away scott free (in
this case and all the rest). Can’t graduate journos (the young ones at
least) have their degrees taken away: bringing x institution into
disrepute, oh well there’s dreaming…

1.

Robert Carnegie said,

September 6, 2008 at 3:50 am

If all young women are HPV-proof then the virus will pretty much die
out and cease to exist.

IIRC the vaccine to be used is the cheaper of two by quite a long way
but leaves more virus strains uncovered, but I think it will destroy
the strains that it is aimed at. And perhaps something better or
cheaper again will be available later.

1.

mikewhit said,

September 9, 2008 at 2:16 pm

The NHS could have brought in the single-vacciners by requiring that
those who opted for single vaccines had to have evidence of the full
course before school admission.

That would have addressed issues about incomplete protection.

1.

MedsVsTherapy said,

September 10, 2008 at 2:50 pm

FYI regarding immunizations in the U.S.: we are a federation of
states, more officially and formally connected than the E.U., but in a
similar arrangement.

The U.S. federal constitution “constitutes” this federation of states,
and describes the relationship of the various states to each other,
and also the realtion of the federal governing structure to the
states.

So, the federal govt does not have ultimate authority in governance of
all topics acruss this federation of states; the states have a range
of issues for which each state is sovereign. Again, very similar to
E.U.

Some things are stipulated. For those that are not, the constitution
notes that all other issues fall to the authority of the individual
states. So, the U.S. was set up as a limted governing body,
especially, purposefully limited and circumscribed.

One of the areas of governance left to the states is “health.” This
includes immunization/ vaccination policy. So, there is no single
answer to whether the U.S. requires MMR or not; there are 50 answers.
Generally, in many things, the majority if not most or all states,
arrive at similar styles of health governance, including the
immunization requirements: most require a professionally and federally
encouraged set of immunizations along with the prototypical schedule
for these.

Whether this is better than the scope and range of the NHS is
debatable, but is nonetheless the reality. The good news is that we
Americans are thus protected from the tyranny of sweeping “health”
efforts - if a president (PM) gets elected that believes immunizations
are bad, and has a correspondingly supportive congress (Parliament),
they are not able to outlaw immunizations. The Fed govt largely
influences state-level health policy through the “carrot” of funding
(i.e., states can apply to get money for this or that health effort)
rather than the “stick” of federal mandate /fiat.

Well, most readers probably know this, but I wanted to throw this
comment in since this is trhe answer regarding the U.S. immunization
policy, or lack thereof.

BTW: this also explains why you will soon see the “electoral college”
vote for the Pres, not us citizens directly: the citizens vote for
whom their state will support for Prez, then this decision affects
each state’s electoral college votes, and each state is the unit of
voting for prez, as it is the states, not individuals, that will be
governed by the fed gov’t.

Now you know more than 95% of us yanks (education also left up to the
states).

Post a Comment

You must bee logged in to post a comment.

Ported to Wordpress by Kaushal Sheth design by Arcsin Sponsored by Web
Hosting
